Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10791-017-9321-y
Neural information retrieval: at the end of the early
years
Kezban Dilek Onal1,2 • Ye Zhang3 • Ismail Sengor Altingovde1 •
Md Mustafizur Rahman3 • Pinar Karagoz1 • Alex Braylan3 •
Brandon Dang3 • Heng-Lu Chang3 • Henna Kim3 • Quinten McNamara3 •
Aaron Angert4 • Edward Banner5 • Vivek Khetan3 • Tyler McDonnell3 •
An Thanh Nguyen3 • Dan Xu3 • Byron C. Wallace5 • Maarten de Rijke2 •
Matthew Lease3
Received: 6 November 2016/Accepted: 20 October 2017/Published online: 10 November 2017
The Author(s) 2017. This article is an open access publication
Abstract A recent ‘‘third wave’’ of neural network (NN) approaches now delivers state-of
the-art performance in many machine learning tasks, spanning speech recognition, com
puter vision, and natural language processing. Because these modern NNs often comprise
multiple interconnected layers, work in this area is often referred to as deep learning.
Recent years have witnessed an explosive growth of research into NN-based approaches to
information retrieval (IR). A significant body of work has now been created. In this paper,
Kezban Dilek Onal and Ye Zhang contributed equally.
Maarten de Rijke and Matthew Lease contributed equally.
& Kezban Dilek Onal
dilek@ceng.metu.edu.tr; k.d.onal@uva.nl
Ye Zhang
yezhang@utexas.edu
Ismail Sengor Altingovde
altingovde@ceng.metu.edu.tr
Md Mustafizur Rahman
nahid@utexas.edu
Pinar Karagoz
karagoz@ceng.metu.edu.tr
Alex Braylan
braylan@cs.utexas.edu
Brandon Dang
budang@utexas.edu
Heng-Lu Chang
hengluchang@utexas.edu
Henna Kim
henna@utexas.edu
Quinten McNamara
quinten.mcnamara@utexas.edu
123
112
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
we survey the current landscape of Neural IR research, paying special attention to the use
of learned distributed representations of textual units. We highlight the successes of neural
IR thus far, catalog obstacles to its wider adoption, and suggest potentially promising
directions for future research.
Keywords Deep learning Distributed representation Neural network Recurrent
neural network Search engine Word embedding Semantic matching Semantic
compositionality
1 Introduction
We are in the midst of a tremendous resurgence of interest and renaissance in research on
artificial neural network (NN) models for machine learning, now commonly referred to as
deep learning.1 While many valuable introductory readings, tutorials, and surveys already
exist for deep learning at large, we are not familiar with any existing literature review
surveying NN approaches to Information Retrieval (IR). Given the great recent rise of
interest in such Neural IR from academic and industrial researchers (Gao et al. 2015;Li
and Lu 2016) and practitioners (Metz 2016; Ordentlich et al. 2016) alike, and given the
1 While not all NNs are ‘deep’ and not all ‘deep’ models are neural, the terms are often conflated in
practice.
Aaron Angert
aarondangert@gmail.com
Edward Banner
ebanner@ccs.neu.edu
Vivek Khetan
vivek.khetan@utexas.edu
Tyler McDonnell
tmcdonnell@utexas.edu
An Thanh Nguyen
atn@cs.utexas.edu
Dan Xu
xudan0812@utexas.edu
Byron C. Wallace
byron@ccs.neu.edu
Maarten de Rijke
derijke@uva.nl
Matthew Lease
ml@utexas.edu
1
2
3
4
5
Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA
IBM, New York, NY, USA
College of Computer and Information Science, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA
123
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
113
significant body of work that has been created in just a few years, we believe that such a
literature review is now timely. IR researchers interested in getting started with Neural IR
currently must identify and compile many scattered works. Unifying these into a coherent
resource provides a single point of reference for those interested in learning about these
emerging approaches, as well as provide a valuable reference compendium for more
experienced Neural IR researchers.
To address this need, this literature review surveys recent work in Neural IR. Our survey
is intended for IR researchers (e.g., typical readers of this journal) already familiar with
fundamental IR concepts and so requiring few definitions or explanations of these. Those
less familiar with IR may wish to consult existing reference materials (Croft et al. 2009;
Manning et al. 2008) for unfamiliar terms or concepts. However, we anticipate many
readers will have relatively less familiarity and experience with NNs and deep learning.
Consequently, we point exemplary introductory resources on deep learning and briefly
introduce key terms, definitions, and concepts in Sect. 3.
In terms of scope, the survey is limited to textual IR. For NN approaches to content
based image retrieval, see Wan et al. (2014). Similarly, we exclude work on NN
approaches to acoustic or multi-modal IR, such as mixing text with imagery (see Ma et al.
2015b, 2016). We also intentionally focus on the current ‘‘third wave’’ revival of NN
research, excluding earlier work.
For the purposes of this survey, the early years of neural IR refers to the period up to the
end of 2016. Relevant research from this period has mainly been focused on the long
standing vocabulary mismatch problem in textual IR: the phenomenon that the vocabulary
of the searcher and the vocabulary used in relevant documents may be different. This focus
was motivated by the success of neural network models in learning distributed represen
tations for words (Baroni et al. 2014; Bengio et al. 2003a; Mikolov et al. 2013a; Pen
nington et al. 2014) and larger textual units (Hill et al. 2016; Le and Mikolov 2014). A
distributed representation for a textual unit is a dense real-valued vector that somehow
encodes the semantics of the textual unit (McClelland et al. 1986). Distributed represen
tations hold the promise of aiding semantic matching: by mapping words and other textual
units to their representations, semantic matches can be computed in the representation
space (Li and Xu 2013). Indeed, recent improvements in obtaining distributed represen
tations using neural models have quickly been used for semantic matching of textual units
in IR tasks.
The problem of mapping words to a representation that can capture their meanings is
referred as distributional semantics and has been studied for a very long time; see Turney
and Pantel (2010) for an overview. Neural language models, which may be viewed as a
particular flavor of distributional semantic models, so-called context-predicting distribu
tional semantic models, have been shown to outperform so-called context-counting models
such as Hyperspace Analog to Language (HAL) (Lund and Burgess 1996), Latent
Semantic Analysis (LSA) (Deerwester et al. 1990), on word analogy and semantic relat
edness tasks (Baroni et al. 2014). Moreover, Levy et al. (2015) improve context-counting
models by adopting lessons from context-predicting models. Bengio et al. (2003a) seem to
have been the first to propose a neural language model; they introduce the idea of
simultaneously learning a language model that predicts a word given its context and its
representation, a so-called word embedding. This idea has since been adopted by many
follow-up studies. The most well-known and most widely used context-predicting models,
word2vec (Mikolov et al. 2013a) and Global Vectors (GloVe) (Pennington et al. 2014),
have been used extensively in recent work on web search. The success of neural word
123
114
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
embeddings has also given rise to work on computing context-predicting representations of
larger textual units, including paragraphs and documents (Hill et al. 2016).
We review the literature in the area and consider both word representations and rep
resentations of larger textual units, such as sentences and paragraphs. We survey the use of
neural language models and word embeddings, and detail applications of so-called neural
semantic compositionality models that determine semantic representations of larger text
units from smaller ones, and we present novel neural semantic compositionality models
designed specifically for IR tasks. In addition to surveying relevant literature, we provide
the reader with a foundation on neural language models and with pointers to relevant
resources that those who are new to the area should appreciate.
Regarding the set of reviewed textual IR tasks, we largely follow the traditional divide
between IR and Natural language processing (NLP), including search-related IR research
and excluding syntactic and semantic NLP work. However, this division is perhaps most
difficult to enforce in regard to two different classes of IR tasks. First is question answering
(QA) and community question answering (CQA) tasks, which perhaps represent the
greatest cross-over between the NLP and IR fields (e.g., see Dumais et al. 2002). Recent
years have shown that QA research is often more focused on semantic understanding,
reasoning and generative models rather than on search over large collections. In this
survey, we review QA work that is focused on retrieval of textual answers. For readers
interested in further reading about deep QA, see Bordes et al. (2014), Gao et al. (2015),
Goldberg (2016), Kumar et al. (2015). Secondly, textual similarity and document repre
sentations are crucial to many different applications such as document clustering and
classification. In this survey, we review neural models for textual similarity only if the
model is evaluated for retrieval of similar textual units. Limiting to Similar Item Retrieval,
we exclude works on neural models for general purpose textual similarity such as Hill et al.
(2016), Kenter and de Rijke (2015).
Finally, regarding nomenclature, our use of Neural IR, referring to machine learning
research on artificial NNs and deep learning, should not be confused with cognitive science
research studying actual neural representations of relevance in the human brain (see
Moshfeghi et al. 2016). In addition, note that the modern appellation of deep learning for
the current ‘‘third wave’’ of NN research owes to these approaches using a large number of
hidden layers in their NN architectures. For this literature review, we have chosen the term
neural (rather than deep) because: (1) most current work on textual NNs in NLP and IR is
often actually quite shallow in the number of layers used (typically only a few hidden
layers and often only one, though some notable recent exceptions exist, such as Conneau
et al. 2016); (2) the use of neural more clearly connects the current wave of deep learning
to the long history of NN research; and (3) our use of Neural IR is consistent with the
naming of this journal’s special issue and the other articles therein.
The remainder of this literature review is organized as follows. To illustrate the rough
evolution of Neural IR research over time, we begin by providing a concise history of
Neural IR in Sect. 2. Following this, in Sect. 3 we present background and terminology;
readers with a background in neural methods can skip over this section. In Sect. 4,we
detail the dimensions that we use for categorizing the publications we review. We clas
sified textual IR work using five main classes of tasks. We review works on Ad-hoc
retrieval, QA, Query Tasks, Sponsored Search and Similar Item Retrieval in Sects. 5–9,
respectively. So far, there have been few publications devoted to neural behavioral models;
we cover them in Sect. 10. In Sect. 11 we present lessons and reflections, and we conclude
in Sect. 12. We include multiple appendices, one with acronyms used in Appendix 1, the
123
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
115
second with a list of resources used in reviewed work; we believe this should help new
comers to the area; see Appendix 2.
2 A brief history of neural IR
In this section we present a bird’s eye view of key publications in neural IR up to the end of
2016. Introductory resources on deep learning cited in Sect. 3.1 (see LeCun et al. 2015;
Goodfellow et al. 2016) explain how the ‘‘third wave’’ of interest in neural network
approaches arose. Key factors include increased availability of ‘‘big data,’’ more powerful
computing resources, and better NN models and parameter estimation techniques. While
early use in language modeling for automatic speech recognition (ASR) and machine
translation (MT) might be loosely related to language modeling for IR (Ponte and Croft
1998), state-of-the-art performance provided by neural language models trained on vast
amounts of data could not be readily applied to the more typical sparse data setting of
training document-specific language models in IR. Similarly, neural approaches in com
puter vision to learn higher-level representations (i.e., visual concepts) from low-level
pixels were not readily transferable to text-based research on words.
In 2009, Salakhutdinov and Hinton (2009) published the first ‘‘third wave’’ Neural IR
publications that we are aware of, employing a deep auto-encoder architecture (Sect. 3.2)
for semantic modeling for related document search (Sect. 9.1.2). They did not have rele
vance judgments for evaluation, so instead used document corpora with category labels and
assumed relevance if a query and document had matching category labels. Little happened
in terms of neural approaches to IR between 2009 and 2013.
In 2013, the Deep Structured Semantic Model (DSSM) (Huang et al. 2013) was
introduced, a neural model that directly addresses the ad-hoc search task. Work by Clin
chant and Perronnin (2013) was the first to aggregate word embeddings for IR. Mikolov
et al. (2013a, b) proposed word2vec. And Lu and Li (2013) proposed DeepMatch, a deep
matching method used on two datasets: CQA (matching questions with answers) and a
Twitter-like micro-blog task (matching tweets with comments).
In 2014, the first two neural IR papers appeared in ACM SIGIR. Gupta et al. (2014)
proposed an auto-encoder approach to mixed-script query expansion, considering
transliterated search queries and learning a character-level ‘‘topic’’ joint distribution over
features of both scripts. Zhang et al. (2014) considered the task of local text reuse, with
three annotators labeling whether or not a given passage represents reuse. New variants of
DSSM were proposed. And Sordoni et al. (2014) investigated a deep IR approach to query
expansion, evaluating ad-hoc search on TREC collections. Le and Mikolov (2014) pro
posed their Paragraph Vector (PV) method for composing word embeddings to induce
semantic representations over longer textual units (see Sect. 11.2.2).
By 2015, work on neural IR had grown beyond what can be concisely described here.
We saw word2vec enter wider adoption in IR research (e.g., Ganguly et al. 2015;
Grbovic et al. 2015a; Kenter and de Rijke 2015; Zheng and Callan 2015; Zuccon et al.
2015), as well as a flourishing of neural IR work appearing at SIGIR (Ganguly et al. 2015;
Grbovic et al. 2015b; Mitra 2015; Severyn and Moschitti 2015; Vulic and Moens 2015;
Zheng and Callan 2015), spanning ad-hoc search (Ganguly et al. 2015; Vulic and Moens
2015; Zheng and Callan 2015; Zuccon et al. 2015), QA sentence selection and Twitter
reranking (Kenter and de Rijke 2015), cross-lingual IR (Vulic and Moens 2015), para
phrase detection (Kenter and de Rijke 2015), query completion (Mitra 2015), query
123
116
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
suggestion (Sordoni et al. 2015), and sponsored search (Grbovic et al. 2015a, b). In 2015,
we also saw the first workshop on Neural IR.2
In 2016, work on neural IR began to accelerate in terms of the volume of work, the
sophistication of methods, and practical effectiveness (e.g., Guo et al. 2016a). SIGIR also
featured its first workshop on the subject,3 as well as its first tutorial on the subject (Li and
Lu 2016). To provide as current of coverage as possible in this literature review, we
include articles appearing up through ACM ICTIR 2016 and CIKM 2016 conferences.
3 Background
We assume that our readers are familiar with basic concepts from IR but possibly less
versed in NN concepts; readers with a background in neural methods can skip ahead to
Sect. 4. Below, in Sect. 3.1, we provide pointers to existing introductory materials that can
help the reader get started. In Sect. 3.2, we present background material for the NN
concepts that are crucial for the rest of the survey. In Sect. 3.3, we briefly review key
concepts that underly the use of neural models for textual IR tasks, viz. distributional
semantics, semantic compositionality, neural language models, training procedures for
neural language models, word2vec and GloVe, and paragraph vectors.
3.1 Introductory tutorials
For general introductions to deep learning, see Arel et al. (2010), Deng (2014), Goodfellow
et al. (2016), LeCun et al. (2015), Schmidhuber (2015), Yu and Deng (2011), and Bengio
(2009). See Broder et al. (2016) for a recent panel discussion on deep learning. For
introductions to deep learning approaches to other domains, see Hinton et al. (2012) for
ASR, Goldberg (2016) for NLP, and Wu et al. (2016) for MT. Goldberg (2016) covers
details on training neural networks and a broader set of architectures including feed
forward NN, convolutional neural network (CNN), recurrent neural network (RNN) and
recursive neural network (RecNN). Cho (2015) focuses on language modeling and machine
translation, sketches a clear picture of encoder-decoder architectures, recurrent networks
and attention modules.
Regarding NN approaches to IR, informative talks and tutorials have been presented by
Gao et al. (2015), Li and Lu (2016), and Li (2016). Many other useful tutorials and talks
can be found online for general deep learning and specific domains. A variety of resources
for deep learning, including links to popular open-source software, can be found at http://
deeplearning.net.
3.2 Background on neural networks
3.2.1 Neural networks
The neural models we will typically consider in this survey are feed-forward networks,
which we refer to as NN for simplicity. A simple example of such an NN is shown in
Fig. 1. Input features are extracted, or learned, by NNs using multiple, stacked fully
2 http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/um/beijing/events/DL-WSDM-2015/.
3 https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/event/neuir2016/.
123
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
117
Fig. 1 Feed-forward fully
connected neural network
Input 
layer
Hidden 
layer
W12
W23
Output 
layer
connected layers. Each layer applies a linear transformation to the vector output of the last
layer (performing an affine transformation). Thus each layer is associated with a matrix of
parameters, to be estimated during learning. This is followed by element-wise application
of a non-linear activation function. In the case of IR, the output of the entire network is
often either a vector representation of the input or some predicted scores. During training, a
loss function is constructed by contrasting the prediction with the ground truth available for
the training data, where training adjusts network parameters to minimize loss. This is
typically performed via the classic back-propagation algorithm (Rumelhart et al. 1988).
For further details, see Goodfellow et al. (2016).
3.2.2 Auto-encoder
An auto-encoder NN is an unsupervised model used to learn a representation for data,
typically for the purpose of dimensionality reduction. Unlike typical NNs, an auto-encoder
is trained to reconstruct the input, and the output has the same dimension as the input. For
more details, see Erhan et al. (2010), Hinton and Salakhutdinov (2006). auto-encoder was
applied in IR in Salakhutdinov and Hinton (2009).
3.2.3 Restricted Boltzman machine (RBM)
An RBM is a stochastic neural network whose binary activations depend on its neighbors
and have a probabilistic binary activation function. RBMs are useful for dimensionality
reduction, classification, regression, collaborative filtering, feature learning, topic model
ing, etc. The RBM was originally proposed by Smolensky (1986) and further popularized
by Nair and Hinton (2010).
3.2.4 Convolutional neural network
In contrast to the densely-connected networks described above, a convolutional neural
network (CNN) (LeCun and Bengio 1995) defines a set of linear filters (kernels) con
necting only spatially local regions of the input, greatly reducing computation. These filters
123
118
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
extract locally occurring patterns. CNNs are typically built following a ‘‘convolution ?
pooling’’ architecture, where a pooling layer following convolution further extracts the
most important features while at the same time reducing dimensionality. We show a basic
example of a CNN in Fig. 2. CNNs were first established by their strong performance on
image classification (Krizhevsky et al. 2012), then later adapted to text-related tasks in
NLP and IR (Collobert et al. 2011; Kalchbrenner et al. 2014; Kim 2014; Zhang and
Wallace 2015; Zhang et al. 2017). As discussed in Sect. 11.2.2, Yang et al. (2016b), Guo
et al. (2016b), and Severyn and Moschitti (2015) question whether CNN models developed
in computer vision and NLP to exploit spatial and positional information are equally-well
suited to the IR domain.
3.2.5 Recurrent neural network
A recurrent neural network (RNN) (Elman 1990) models sequential inputs, e.g., sequences
of words in a document. We show a basic example of an RNN in Fig. 3. Individual input
Convolutional layer
(Filters)
Embedding
layer
Feature
maps
1-max 
pooling
Text 
Sequence
Vector 
Fig. 2 One-dimensional CNN with only one convolution layer (six filters and six feature maps), followed
by a 1-max-pooling layer
123
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
119
Fig. 3 Recurrent neural network
(RNN). Here, x is the input, A is
the computation unit shared
across time steps, and h is the
hidden state vector
h0
A
h1
ht
A
x0
A
x1
xt
...
units (e.g., words) are typically encoded in vector representations. RNNs usually read
inputs sequentially; one can think of the input order as indexing ‘‘time.’’ Thus, the first
word corresponds to an observation at time 0, the second at time 1, and so on. The key
component of RNNs is a hidden state vector that encodes salient information extracted
from the input read thus far. At each step during traversal (at each time point t), this state
vector is updated as a function of the current state vector and the input at time t. Thus, each
time point is associated with its own unique state vector, and when the end of a piece of
text is reached, the state vector will capture the context induced by the entire sequence.
A technical problem with fitting the basic RNN architecture just described is the
‘‘vanishing gradient problem’’ (Pascanu et al. 2013) inherent to parameter estimation via
back-propagation ‘‘through time.’’ The trouble is that gradients must flow from later time
steps of the sequence back to earlier bits of the input. This is difficult for long sequences, as
the gradient tends to degrade, or ‘‘vanish,’’ as they are passed backwards through time.
Fortunately, there are two commonly used variants of RNNs that aim to mitigate this
problem (and have proven empirically successful in doing so): LSTM and GRU.
Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) was the first
approach introduced to address the vanishing gradient problem. In addition to the hidden
state vector, LSTMs have a memory cell structure, governed by three gates. An input gate
is used to control how much the memory cell will be influenced by the new input; a forget
gate dictates how much previous information in the memory cell will be forgotten; and an
output gate controls how much the memory cell will influence the current hidden state. All
three of these gates depend on the previous hidden state and the current input. For a more
detailed description of LSTM and more LSTM variants, see Graves (2013) and Greff et al.
(2015).
Bahdanau et al. (2014)’s Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) is a more recent architecture,
similar to the LSTM model but simpler (and thus with fewer parameters). Empirically,
GRUs have been found to perform comparably to LSTMs, despite their comparative
simplicity (Chung et al. 2014). Instead of the memory cell used by LSTMs, an update gate
is used to govern the extent to which the hidden gate will be updated, and a reset gate is
used to control the extent to which the previous hidden state will influence the current state.
3.2.6 Attention
The notion of attention has lately received a fair amount of interest from NN researchers.
The idea is to imbue the model with the ability to learn which bits of a sequence are most
important for a given task (in contrast, e.g., to relying only on the final hidden state vector).
123
120
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
Attention was first proposed in the context of neural machine translation model by
Bahdanau et al. (2014). The original RNN model for machine translation (Sutskever et al.
2014) encodes the source sentence into a fixed-length vector (by passing an RNN over the
input, as described in Sect. 3.2.5). This is then accepted as input by a decoder network,
which uses the single encoded vector as the only information pertaining to the source
sentence. This means that all relevant information required for the translation must be
stored in a single vector—a difficult aim.
The attention mechanism was proposed to alleviate this requirement. At each time step
(as the decoder generates each word), the model identifies a set of positions in the source
sentence that is most relevant to its current position in the output (a function of its index
and what it has generated thus far). These positions will be associated with corresponding
state vectors. The current contextualizing vector (to be used to generate output) can then be
taken as a sum of these, weighted by their estimated relevance. This attention mechanism
has also been used in image caption generation (Xu et al. 2015). A similar line of work
includes Neural Turing Machines by Graves et al. (2014) and Memory Networks by
Weston et al. (2014).
3.3 Word embeddings and semantic compositionality
3.3.1 Distributional semantics
A distributional semantic model (DSM) is a model that relies on the distributional
hypothesis (Harris 1954), according to which words that occur in the same contexts tend to
have similar meanings, for associating words with vectors that can capture their meaning.
Statistics on observed contexts of words in a corpus is quantified to derive word vectors.
The most common choice of context is the set of words that co-occur in a context window.
Baroni et al. (2014) classify existing DSMs into two categories: context-counting and
context-predicting. The context-counting category includes earlier DSMs such as Hyper
space Analog to Language (HAL) (Lund and Burgess 1996), Latent Semantic Analysis
(LSA) (Deerwester et al. 1990). In these models, low-dimensional word vectors are
obtained via factorisation of a high-dimensional sparse co-occurrence matrix. The context
predicting models are neural language models in which word vectors are modelled as
additional parameters of a neural network that predicts co-occurrence likelihood of con
text-word pairs. Neural language models comprise an embedding layer that maps a word to
its distributed representation. A distributed representation of a symbol is a vector of
features that characterize the meaning of the symbol and are not mutually exclusive
(McClelland et al. 1986).
Early neural language models were not aimed at learning representations for words.
However, it soon turned out that the embedding layer component, which addresses the
curse of dimensionality caused by one-hot vectors (Bengio et al. 2003a), yields useful
distributed word representations, so-called word embeddings. Collobert and Weston (2008)
are the first ones to show the benefit of word embeddings as features for NLP tasks. Soon
afterwards, word embeddings became widespread after the introduction of the shallow
models Skip-gram and Continuous Bag of Words (CBOW) in the word2vec framework
by Mikolov et al. (2013a, b); see Sect. 3.3.5.
Baroni et al. (2014) report that context-predicting models outperform context-counting
models on several tasks, including question sets, semantic relatedness, synonym detection,
concept categorization and word analogy. In contrast, Levy et al. (2015) point out that the
success of the popular context-predicting models word2vec and GloVe does not
123
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
121
originate from the neural network architecture and the training objective but from the
choices of hyper-parameters for contexts. A comprehensive analysis reveals that when
these hyper-parameter choices are applied to context-counting models, no consistent
advantage of context-predicting models is observed over context-counting models.
3.3.2 Semantic compositionality
Compositional distributional semantics or semantic compositionality (SC) is the problem
of formalizing how the meaning of larger textual units such as sentences, phrases, para
graphs and documents are built from the meanings of words (Mitchell and Lapata 2010).
Work on SC studies are motivated by the Principle of Compositionality which states that
the meaning of a complex expression is determined by the meanings of its constituent
expressions and the rules used to combine them.
A neural SC model maps the high-dimensional representation of a textual unit into a
distributed representation by forward propagation in a neural network. The neural network
parameters are learned by training to optimize task-specific objectives. Both the granularity
of the target textual unit and the target task play an important role for the choice of neural
network type and training objective. A SC model that considers the order of words in a
sentence and aims to obtain a deep understanding may fail in an application that requires
representations that can encode high-level concepts in a large document. A comparison of
neural SC models of sentences learned from unlabelled data is presented in Hill et al.
(2016). Besides the models reviewed by Hill et al. (2016), there exist sentence-level
models that are trained using task-specific labelled data. For instance, a model can be
trained to encode the sentiment of a sentence using a dataset of sentences annotated with
sentiment class labels (Li et al. 2015).
To the best of our knowledge, there is no survey on neural SC models for distributed
representations of long documents, although the representations are useful not only for
document retrieval but also for document classification and recommendation. In Sect. 4.2.2
we review the subset of neural SC models and associated training objectives adopted
specifically in IR tasks.
3.3.3 Neural language models
A language model is a function that predicts the acceptability of pieces of text in a
language. Acceptability scores are useful for ranking candidates in tasks like machine
translation or speech recognition. The probability of a sequence of words Pðw1;w2, ..., wnÞ
in a language, can be computed by Eq. 1, in accordance with the chain rule:
Pðw1;w2;...;wt 1;wtÞ¼Pðw1ÞPðw2 j w1Þ Pðwt j w1;w2;...;wt 1Þ ð
1Þ
Probabilistic language models mostly approximate Eq. 1 by Pðwt j wt n, ..., wt 1Þ, con
sidering only a limited context of size n, that immediately precedes wt. In neural language
models the probability Pðw j cÞ of a word w to follow the context c is computed by a neural
network. The neural network takes a context c and outputs the conditional probability
Pðw j cÞ of every word w in the vocabulary V of the language:
P
expðshðw;cÞÞ
Pðw j c;hÞ¼
w02V expðshðw0;cÞÞ :
ð2Þ
123
122
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
Here, shðw;cÞ is an unnormalized score for the compatibility of w given the context c;
shðw;cÞ is computed via forward propagation of the context c through a neural network
defined with the set of parameters h. Note that Pðw j cÞ is computed by the normalized
exponential (softmax) function in Eq. 2, over the shðw;cÞ scores for the entire vocabulary.
Parameters of the neural network are learned by training on a text corpus using gradient
descent based optimization algorithms to maximize the likelihood function L in Eq. 3,ona
given corpus T:
X
LðhÞ¼
ðt;cÞ2T
Pðt j c;hÞ:
ð3Þ
The first neural language model published is the Neural Network Language Model
(NNLM) (Bengio et al. 2003a). The common architecture shared by neural language
models is depicted in Fig. 4, with example input context c ¼ w1;w2;w3 and the word to
predict being w4, extracted from the observed sequence c ¼ w1;w2;w3;w4. Although a
probability distribution over the vocabulary V is computed, the word that should have the
maximum probability is shown at the output layer, for illustration purposes.
The neural network takes one-hot vectors w1;w2;w3 of the words in the context. The
dimensionality of the one-hot vectors is 1 jVj. The embedding layer E in Fig. 4 is indeed
a jVj d-dimensional matrix whose ith row is the d-dimensional word embedding for the
ith word in the vocabulary. The embedding vector of the ith word in the vocabulary is
obtained by multiplying the one-hot vector of the word with the E matrix or simply
extracting the ith row of the embedding matrix. Consequently, high dimensional one-hot
vectors of words w1;w2;w3 are mapped to their d-dimensional embedding vectors e1;e2;e3
by the embedding layer. Note that d is usually chosen to be in the range 100–500 whereas
|V| can go up to millions.
The hidden layer in Fig. 4 takes the embedding vectors e1;e2;e3 of the context words
and creates a vector hc for the input context. This layer differs between neural language
model architectures. In NNLM (Bengio et al. 2003a) it is a non-linear neural network layer
whereas in the CBOW model of word2vec (Mikolov et al. 2013a), it is vector addition
over word embeddings. In the Recurrent Neural Network Language Model (RNNLM)
Fig. 4 Architecture of neural
language models
w4
Classifier Layer
hc
Hidden Layer
e1 e2 e3
Word Embedding Layer
w1
w2
w3
123
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
123
(Mikolov et al. 2010) the hidden context representation is computed by a recurrent neural
network. Besides the hidden layer, the choice of context also differs among models. In
Collobert and Weston (2008) and in the CBOW model (Mikolov et al. 2013a) context is
defined by the words that surround a center word in a symmetric context. In the NNLM
(Bengio et al. 2003a) and RNNLM (Mikolov et al. 2010) models, the context is defined by
words that precede the target word. The Skip-gram (Mikolov et al. 2013a) takes a single
word as input and predicts words from a dynamically sized symmetric context window
around the input word.
The classifier layer in Fig. 4, which is composed of a weights matrix C of dimension
d jVj and a bias vector of dimension |V|, is used to compute shðw;cÞ using Eq. 4:
shðw;cÞ¼hcC þb:
ð4Þ
To sumup, the neural network architecture for a Neural Language Model (NLM) is defined
by |V|, d, the context type, the context size |c| and the function in the hidden layer. The
parameter set h to be optimized includes the embedding matrix E, parameters from the
hidden layer, the weights matrix C and the bias vector b of the classifier layer. The
embedding layer E is treated as an ordinary layer of the network, its weights are initialized
randomly and updated with back-propagation during training of the neural network.
3.3.4 Efficient training of NLMs
As mentioned in our discussion of Eq. 1, the output of a NLM is a normalized probability
distribution over the entire vocabulary. Therefore, for each training sample (context pair
(t, c)), it is necessary to compute the softmax function in Eq. 2 and consider the whole
vocabulary for computing the gradients of the likelihood function in back-propagation.
This makes the training procedure computationally expensive and prevents the scalability
of the models to very large corpora.
Several remedies for efficiently training NLMs have been introduced. The reader may
refer to Chen et al. (2016) for a comparison of these remedies for the NNLM. The first
group of remedies such as Hierarchical Softmax (Morin and Bengio 2005) and differen
tiated softmax (Chen et al. 2016) propose updates to the softmax layer architectures for
efficient computation. The second approach, adopted by methods like Importance Sam
pling (IS) (Bengio et al. 2003b) and Noise Contrastive Estimation (NCE) (Mnih and Teh
2012), is to avoid the normalization by using modified loss functions to approximate the
softmax. Collobert and Weston (2008) propose the cost function in Eq. 5, which does not
require normalization over the vocabulary. The NLM is trained to compute higher sh scores
for observed context-word pairs (c, t) compared to the negative samples constructed by
replacing t with any other word w in V. The context is defined as the words in a symmetric
window around the center word t.
X
ðt;cÞ2T
X
w2V
maxð0;1 shðt;cÞþshðw;cÞÞ
ð5Þ
Mnih and Teh (2012) apply NCE (Gutmann and Hyva¨rinen 2012) to NLM training. By
using NCE, the probability density estimation problem is converted to a binary classifi
cation problem. A two-class training data set is created from the training corpus by treating
the observed context-word pairs (t, c) as positive samples and k noisy pairs ðt0;cÞ con
structed replacing t with a word t0 sampled from the noise distribution q.
123
124
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
3.3.5 word2vec and GloVe
Mikolov et al. (2013a) introduce the Skip-gram and CBOW models that follow the NLM
architecture with a linear layer for computing a distributed context representation. Figure 5
illustrates the architecture of word2vec models with context windows of size five. The
CBOW model is trained to predict the center word of a given context. In the CBOW model,
the hidden context representation is computed by the sum of the word embeddings. On the
contrary, the Skip-gram model is trained to predict words that occur in a symmetric context
window given the center word. The name Skip-gram is used since the size of symmetric
context window is selected randomly from the range [0, c] for each center word. Skip
gram embeddings are shown to outperform embeddings obtained from NNLMs and
RNNLMs in capturing the semantic and syntactic relationships between the words.
word2vec owes its widespread adoption in the NLP and IR communities to its
scalability. Efficient training of Skip-gram and CBOW models is achieved by hiearchical
softmax (Morin and Bengio 2005) with a Huffman tree (Mikolov et al. 2013a). In follow
up work (Mikolov et al. 2013b), Negative Sampling (NEG) is proposed for efficiently
training the Skip-Gram model. NEG is a variant of NCE. NEG, differently from NCE,
assumes the noise distribution q to be uniform and k ¼jVj while computing the conditional
probabilities. For a detailed discussion of NCE and NEG, see notes by Dyer (2014). It is
crucial to note that the Skip-Gram with Negative Sampling (SGNS) departs from the goal
of learning a language model and only embedding layer of the model is used in practice.
Subsampling frequent words is another extension introduced in Mikolov et al. (2013b)
for speeding up training and increasing the quality of embeddings. Each word wi in the
corpus is discarded with probability pðwiÞ, computed as a function of its frequency fðwiÞ in
the corpus, given in Eq. 6:
r
pðwiÞ¼1
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
t
f ðwiÞ
:
ð6Þ
GloVe GloVe (Pennington et al. 2014) combines global context and local context in the
training objective for learning word embeddings. In contrast to NLMs, where embeddings
are optimized to maximize the likelihood of local contexts, GloVe embeddings are trained
to fit the co-occurrence ratio matrix.
(a)
w3
Word Embedding Layer (E)
w1
w2
w4
w5
(b)
w1
w2
w4
w5
Word Embedding Layer (E)
w3
Fig. 5 Models of the word2vec framework. a Continuous bag of words (CBOW). b skip-gram
123
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
125
Context-counting versus context-predicting Levy et al. (2015) discuss that diluting
frequent words before training enlarges the context window size in practice. Experiments
show that the hyper-parameters about context-windows, like dynamic size and subsam
pling frequent words, have a notable impact on the performance of SGNS and GloVe
(Levy et al. 2015). Levy et al show that when these choices are applied to traditional
DSMs, no consistent advantage of SGNS and GloVe is observed. In contrast to the con
clusions obtained in Baroni et al. (2014), the success of context-predicting models is
attributed to choice of hyper-parameters, which can also be used for context-counting
DSMs, rather than to the neural architecture or the training objective.
3.3.6 Paragraph vector
The PV (Le and Mikolov 2014) extends word2vec in order to learn representations for
so-called paragraph, textual units of any length. Similar to word2vec, it is composed of
two separate models, namely Paragraph Vector with Distributed Memory (PV-DM) and
Paragraph Vector with Distributed Bag of Words (PV-DBOW). The architectures of PV
DM and PV-DBOW are illustrated in Fig. 6. The PV-DBOW model is a Skip-Gram model
where the input is a paragraph instead of a word. The PV-DBOW is trained to predict a
sample context given the input paragraph. In contrast, the PV-DM model is trained to
predict a word that is likely to occur in the input paragraph after the sample context. The
PV-DM model is a CBOW model extended with a paragraph in the input layer and a
document embedding matrix. In the PV-DBOW model, only paragraph embeddings are
learned whereas in the PV-DM model word embeddings and paragraph embeddings are
learned, simultaneously.
In Fig. 6, p stands for the index of the input paragraph and w1;w2;w3;w4 represent the
indices of the words in a contiguous sequence of words sampled from this paragraph. A
sequence of size four is selected just for illustration purposes. Also, D represents the
paragraph embedding matrix and E stands for the word embedding matrix. At the lowest
layer, the input paragraph p is mapped to its embedding by a lookup in the D matrix. The
hidden context representation is computed by summing the embeddings of the input words
and paragraph, which is the same as in the CBOW model.
Paragraph vector models are trained on unlabelled paragraph collections. An embed
ding for each paragraph in the collection is learned at the end of training. The embedding
for an unseen paragraph can be obtained by an additional inference stage. In the inference
(a) 
w4
D-Lookup
p
E-Lookup
w1
w2
w3
(b)
w1
w2
w3
D-Lookup
p
Fig. 6 Models of the paragraph vector framework. a PV-DM, b PV-DBOW
w4
123
126
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
stage, D is extended with columns for new paragraphs; D is updated using gradient descent
while other parameters of the model are kept fixed.
4 Taxonomy
To organize the material surveyed in this paper, we use a simple taxonomy. We classify
publications based on the IR task to which neural models are applied and how neural
network models are utilized for solving the target IR task. In the next subsections, we first
detail the sub-categories of the Task and How features. Secondly, we provide a roadmap
for the rest of the survey in Sect. 4.3.
4.1 Task
As mentioned previously, the majority of reviewed work is about textual IR tasks. Each of
the tasks is concerned with a different target textual unit (TTU) or with different TTU
pairs. We group publications on textual IR into five classes given in Table 1, considering a
TTU or TTU pairs with different characteristics.
The hierarchy of tasks in the rest of the survey is as follows:
1. Ad-Hoc retrieval: Ad-hoc retrieval refers to a single search performed by a user: a
single query, with no further interaction or feedback, on the basis of which an IR
system strives to return an accurate document ranking. This comprises of the following
tasks:
• Document ranking.
• Query expansion.
• Query re-weighting.
• Result diversification.
• Semantic expertise retrieval.
• Product search.
2. Query understanding: This category includes IR tasks concerned with understanding
the user intent in order to assist the user in typing queries or improving document
retrieval. Publications here are focused on distributed representations of queries and
finding similar queries that can better express user intent. We distinguish the following
tasks:
• Query suggestion.
• Query auto completion.
• Query classification.
Table 1 TTU or TTU pairs for
the textual IR tasks covered in
the survey
Task
TTU or TTU pair
Relation
Ad-hoc retrieval
Query understanding
Sponsored search
Question answering
Similar item retrieval
Query-document
Query
Query-ad
Question-answer
Document-document
Relevant
Similar
Relevant
Answer
Similar
123
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
127
3. Question answering: This class includes tasks that are focused on retrieval of text
segments that answers the user question. Answer segments may have different
granularities, such as sentence, passage or even the entire document. Here we identify
two tasks:
• Answer sentence retrieval.
• Conversational agents.
4. Sponsored search: This category includes tasks related to retrieval of ads relevant to
user queries.
5. Similar item retrieval: This category includes tasks related to retrieving similar items
of the same type as the query. There exist a large number of neural semantic
compositionality models for textual similarity. To remain focused we limit ourselves
to publications that focus on the retrieval effectiveness for similar item search. The
following tasks are considered:
• Related document search.
• Detecting text re-use.
• Similar Question Retrieval in CQA.
• Content-based recommendation.
4.2 How
The How feature defines how neural models and distributed representations are adopted
and utilized in an IR task. The methods can be grouped in two main classes: Aggregate and
Learn. Availability of code and existing embeddings from word2vec (Mikolov et al.
2013b) and GloVe (Pennington et al. 2014) (see Appendix ‘‘Word embeddings’’) moti
vated the Aggregate approaches for Neural IR, especially for extending traditional IR
models to integrate word embeddings. In contrast, the Learn category covers conceptually
different approaches which directly incorporate word embeddings within NN models,
reflecting a more significant shift toward pursuing end-to-end NN architectures in IR.
4.2.1 Aggregate
Publications in this category are focused on the following research question raised by
Clinchant and Perronnin (2013): If we were provided with an embedding of words in a
continuous space, how could we best use it in IR/clustering tasks? The methods in this
category rely on pre-trained word embeddings as external resources in order to build or
extend relevance matching functions. Existing work can be split into two sub-categories
depending on how the embeddings are utilized:
Explicit
Word embeddings are considered as building blocks for distributed TTU
representations. Publications that follow this pattern treat a TTU as a Bag of
Embedded Words (BoEW) or a set of points in the word embedding space. The
BoEW is aggregated to build a single vector for the TTU. The most common
aggregation method is averaging or summing the vectors of the terms in the
TTU.
123
128
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
Implicit
Here, one utilizes the vector similarity in the embedding space in language
modeling frameworks without explicit computation of distributed
representations for TTUs pairs. For instance, Zuccon et al. (2015) compute
translation probabilities of word pairs in a translation language model retrieval
framework with cosine similarity of Skip-Gram vectors.
4.2.2 Learn
This category covers work on learning end-to-end neural models for IR, specifically for
semantic matching of TTU pairs. The neural models in this category are designed and
trained to learn word embeddings and semantic compositionality functions for building
distributed representations for TTUs or TTU pairs, simultaneously, from scratch, given
only the raw text of TTUs. We observed that in some recent publications, the similarity or
relevance function on top of distributed representations is also modeled with a neural
network and learned, simultaneously.
In the rest of the survey, Semantic Compositionality Network (SCN) refers to a neural
network that composes distributed TTU representations based on either the embeddings of
words in the TTU or the one-hot term vector. Publications in this category mainly vary in
the training objectives defined based on the distributed representation for TTUs. Four
separate training objectives are observed in the reviewed work. Based on these objectives,
we define the four sub-categories, namely
• Learn to autoencode,
• Learn to match,
• Learn to predict and
• Learn to generate,
all of which are detailed below.
Learn to autoencode This category covers mostly relatively early work that relies on
auto-encoder (see Sect. 3.2.2) architectures for learning TTU representations. As depicted
in Fig. 7, the training objective is to restore the input x based on the distributed repre
sentation hx learned by the encoder. Generally, the encoder and decoder are mirrored
neural networks with different architectures.
Learn to matchLearning to match (Li and Xu 2013) is the problem of learning a
matching function f(x, y) that computes a degree of similarity between two objects x and y
from two different spaces X and Y. Given training data T composed of triples (x, y, r),
learning to match is the optimization problem in Eq. 7:
X
arg min
f 2F
ðx;y;rÞ2T
Lðr; fðx; yÞÞ:
ð7Þ
Here, L denotes a loss function between the actual similarity score r and the score predicted
by the f function. Learn to match models introduce neural architectures for computing the
relevance matching function f.
Enc
x hx x
Dec
Fig. 7 Auto-encoder architecture. Note that the encoder is the Semantic Compositionality Network (SCN)
123
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
129
Learn to match models require similarity assessments for training. Since it is difficult to
obtain large amounts of supervised data, click information in click-through logs are
exploited to derive similarity assessments for query-document and query-ad pairs. If a pair
(x, y) is associated with clicks, the objects are assumed to be similar; they are dissimilar in
the absence of clicks. In the case of query-query pairs, co-occurrence in a session is
accepted as similarity signal that can be extracted from query logs. We replace x and y of
Eq. 7 with q and d to represent a query and a document object, respectively. The document
object can be any textual unit that needs to be matched against a query, such as a docu
ment, query or ad; ðq;dþÞ denotes a (query-clicked document) pair extracted from logs.
A training objective adopted by the majority of the publications in this category is to
minimize the negative log likelihood function in Eq. 8:
Y
L ¼ log
Pðdþ j qÞ ð
8Þ
ðq;dþÞ
The likelihood of a document d given a query q, is computed by Eq. 9 with a softmax over
similarity scores of distributed representations:
P
expðfðq;dÞÞ
Pðd j qÞ¼
d02D expðfðq;d0Þ
ð9Þ
Here, f is a relevance matching function; L requires the computation of a probability
distribution over the entire document collection D for each ðq;dþÞ pair. Since this is
computationally expensive, D is approximated by a randomly selected small set of
unclicked documents, similar to the softmax approximation methods for neural language
models in Sect. 3.3.4.
There are two patterns of neural architectures for the relevance matching function f,
namely Representation Based and Interaction Based, as illustrated in Fig. 8. InRepre
sentation Based architectures, the query and document are independently run through
mirrored neural models (typically this would be a Siamese architecture Bromley et al.
1993, in which weights are shared between the networks); relevance scoring is then per
formed by a model operating over the two induced representations. In contrast, in an
Interaction Based architecture, one first constructs a joint representation of the query and
document pair and then runs this joint input through a network. The architectures differ in
their inputs and the semantics of the hidden/representational layers. Guo et al. (2016a)
point out that Representation Based architectures fail to catch exact matching signals
which are crucial for retrieval tasks.
In Representation Based architectures, input vector representations of q, d are mapped
into distributed representations hq, hd by the Semantic Compositionality Network (SCN)
and the similarity score of the objects is computed by the similarity of the distributed
representations. Usually, cosine similarity is used to compute the similarity of represen
tation vectors created by the SCN, as given in Eqs. 10 and 11:
hq ¼ SCNðqÞ;hd ¼ SCNðdÞ ð
10Þ
f ðq; dÞ¼
hq hd
hq hd
j j :
ð11Þ
In Fig. 9, the training objective in Eq. 8 is illustrated on a Representation Based archi
tecture with four randomly selected non-relevant documents. Let d1 be a relevant docu
ment and d2;d3;d4;d5 non-relevant documents for the query q. The Siamese network is
123
130
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
(a)
Query Q
(b)
Matching/scoring
Representation
(separate for Q and D)
Input
Document D
Joint representation
Query Q
Matching/scoring
Representation
(joint for Q and D)
Input
Document D
Fig. 8 Two basic neural architectures for scoring the relevance of a TTU pair, query and document for
illustrative purposes. a Representation Based, b Interaction Based. This figure is inspired by Figure 1 in Guo
et al. (2016a)
applied to compute similarity scores for each pair ðq;diÞ. The target values for the output
nodes of the entire network is forced to be [1.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0] during training.
Learn to predict The success of word-based neural language models has motivated
models for learning representations of larger textual units from unlabelled data (Hill et al.
2016; Le and Mikolov 2014). As mentioned previously, neural language models are
context-predicting distributional semantic model (DSMs). Learn to predict models rely on
an extension of the context-prediction idea to larger linguistic units, which is that similar
textual units occur in similar contexts. For instance, sentences within a paragraph and
paragraphs within a document are semantically related. The organization of textual units—
of different granularity—in corpora can be used to learn distributed representations.
Contextual relationships of textual units are exploited to design training objectives similar
to neural language models.
We refer to models that rely on the extended distributional semantics principle to obtain
distributed TTU representations as Learn to predict models, in accordance with the con
text-predicting label used for neural language models. Learn to predict models are neural
network models trained using unlabelled data to maximize the likelihood of the context of
a TTU. Among the models reviewed in Hill et al. (2016), Skip-thought Vector (Kiros et al.
2015) and Paragraph Vector (PV) (Le and Mikolov 2014) are successful representatives of
the learn to predict context idea. The training objective of the Skip-thought Vector is to
SCN
q
SCN
d1
SCN
d2
SCN
d3
SCN
d4
SCN
d5
P(di | q): Likelihood scores
f(di,q): Relevance scores
h: Distributed representation of TTUs
Semantic compositionality sub-network
Input TTU Vectors
Fig. 9 Architecture of Representation Based Learn to match models adapted from Deng and Yu (2013)
123
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
131
maximize the likelihood of the previous and the next sentences given an input sentence.
The context of the sentence is defined as its neighboring sentences. For details of the PV
model, see Sect. 3.
The main context of a textual unit consists of the words it contains. Containment should
be seen as a form of co-occurrence and the content of a document is required to define its
textual context. Two documents are similar if they contain similar words. Besides the
content, temporal context is useful for defining TTU contexts. For instance, the context of
the query can be defined by other queries in the same session (Grbovic et al. 2015b).
Finally, the context of a document is defined by joining its content and the neighboring
documents in a document stream in Djuric et al. (2015).
Learn to generate This category covers work in which a synthetic textual unit is gen
erated based on the distributed representation of an input TTU. Studies in this category are
motivated by successful applications of RNNs, LSTM networks, and encoder-decoder
architectures, illustrated in Fig. 10, to sequence-to-sequence learning (Graves 2012) tasks
such as machine translation (Cho et al. 2014) and image captioning (Xu et al. 2015). In
these applications, an input textual or visual object is encoded into a distributed repre
sentation with a neural network and a target sequence of words—a translation in the target
language or a caption—is generated by a decoder network.
4.3 Roadmap
In Table 2, we provide a classification of reviewed work with respect to the features Task
and Approach.
In Sects. 5–9 below we survey work on neural models for Ad-hoc retrieval, query
understanding, question answering, sponsored search and similar item retrieval,
respectively.
5 Ad-hoc retrieval
In this section we survey work on neural models for ad-hoc retrieval tasks. We devote a
subsection per task listed in Table 2 under ad-hoc retrieval and follow the How feature as
explained in Sect. 4 for organizing the subsections.
5.1 Document ranking
5.1.1 Aggregate
In this section, we present publications that rely on pre-trained word embeddings for ad
hoc retrieval under the Implicit and Explicit categories.
Explicit Clinchant and Perronnin (2013) present the earliest work using word embed
dings in IR. The context-counting model Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI) (Deerwester
Enc
x hx y
Dec
Fig. 10 Encoder decoder architecture. Note that the encoder is the SCN
123
Table2 Classificationof reviewedwork
Section Task Approach Publications
5 Ad-hocretrieval
5.1.1 Documentranking Aggregate Explicit Boytsovetal. (2016),ClinchantandPerronnin
(2013),Gangulyetal. (2016),Mitraetal.
(2016),Nalisnicketal. (2016),Vulicand
Moens(2015)
Implicit Gangulyetal. (2015),Rekabsazetal. (2016b),
Royetal. (2016a),Zucconetal. (2015)
5.1.2 Documentranking Learn Learnto
match
Guoetal. (2016b),Huangetal. (2013),Li
etal. (2014),Nguyenetal. (2016),Palangi
etal.(2014,2016),Shenetal.(2014a,b),Ye
etal. (2015)
Learnto
predict
Aietal. (2016a),Djuricetal. (2015)
Learnto
generate
Liomaetal. (2016)
5.2 Queryre
weighting
Explicit ZhengandCallan(2015)
5.3.1 Queryexpansion Aggregate Explicit ALMasrietal. (2016),Ameretal. (2016),
Rekabsazetal. (2016a),Royetal. (2016b)
Implicit Diazetal.(2016),ZamaniandCroft(2016a,b)
5.3.2 Learn Learnto
autoencode
Guptaetal. (2014)
Learnto
match
Sordonietal. (2014)
5.4.1 Diversification Aggregate Explicit Onaletal. (2015)
5.4.2 Learn Learnto
match
Xiaetal. (2016)
5.5.1 Expertiseretrieval Learn Learnto
predict
VanGyseletal. (2016b)
5.6.1 Productsearch Learn Learnto
match
VanGyseletal. (2016a)
6 Querytasks
6.1 Queryauto
completion
Aggregate Implicit CaianddeRijke(2016a)
Learn Learnto
match
Mitra(2015),MitraandCraswell (2015)
6.2.1 Querysuggestion Learn Learnto
generate
Sordonietal. (2015)
6.3 Query
classification
Aggregate Explicit ZamaniandCroft (2016b)
6.4 Proactivesearch Learn Learnto
generate
Luukkonenetal. (2016)
7 Question
answering
7.1.1 Answersentence
retrieval
Learn Learnto
match
SeverynandMoschitti (2015),Sugguetal.
(2016),WangandNyberg(2015),Yanetal.
(2016),Yuetal. (2014)
7.2.1 Conversational
agents
Learn Learnto
match
Yanetal. (2016)
132 InfRetrievalJ(2018)21:111–182
123
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
133
Table 2 continued
Section Task
Approach
Publications
8
9
10
Sponsored search
8.1
8.2
9.1.1
9.1.2
9.2
9.3.1
9.3.2
9.4.1
9.4.2
Sponsored search
Similar item
retrieval
Related document
search
Detecting text
reuse
Similar Question
Retrieval
Content-based
recommendation
Learn
Learn
Learn to
match
Learn to
predict
Aggregate Explicit
Learn
Learn to
autoencode
Learn to
predict
Aggregate Explicit
Aggregate Explicit
Learn
Learn to
match
Learn to
generate
Aggregate Explicit
Learn
Non-textual/Behavioural
Learn to
match
Azimi et al. (2015), Zhai et al. (2016a, b)
Grbovic et al. (2015a, b), Zhang et al. (2016a)
Kim et al. (2016), Kusner et al. (2014)
Salakhutdinov and Hinton (2009)
Dai et al. (2014), Djuric et al. (2015), Le and
Mikolov (2014)
Zhang et al. (2014)
Zhou et al. (2015)
Lei et al. (2016)
Lei et al. (2016)
Manotumruksa et al. (2016)
Gao et al. (2014)
Borisov et al. (2016b), Zhang et al. (2016a)
et al. 1990) is used to induce word embeddings, which are then transformed into fixed
length Fisher Vector (FVs) via Jaakkola et al. (1999)’s Fisher Kernel (FK) framework. The
FVs are then compared via cosine similarity for document ranking. Experiments on ad-hoc
search using Lemur are reported for three collections: TREC ROBUST04, TREC Disks
1&2, and English CLEF 2003 Ad-hoc. While results show improvements over standard
LSI on all three collections, standard TF-IDF performs slightly better on two of the three
collections, and Divergence From Randomness (DFR) (Amati and Van Rijsbergen 2002)
performs far better on all collections. The authors note that thse ‘‘results are not surprising
as it has been shown experimentally in many studies that latent-based approaches such as
LSI are generally outperformed by state-of-the-art IR models in Ad-Hoc tasks.’’
Vulic and Moens (2015) are the first to aggregate word embeddings learned with a
context-predicting distributional semantic model (DSM). Query and document are repre
sented as a sum of word embeddings learned from a pseudo-bilingual document collection
with a Skip-gram model (Ganguly et al. 2016 discusses why such a representation for
documents could be noisy). Each document pair in a document-aligned translation corpus
is mapped to a pseudo-bilingual document by merging source and target documents,
removing sentence boundaries and shuffling the complete document. Owing to these
shuffled pseudo-bilingual documents, words from the source and target language are
mapped to the same embedding space. This approach for learning bilingual word
embeddings is referred to as Bilingual word Embeddings Skip-Gram (BWESG).
123
134
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
Documents are ranked by the cosine similarity of their embedding vector to the query
vector. The query-document representations are evaluated both on cross-lingual and mono
lingual retrieval tasks. For the monolingual experiments, ranking the proposed distributed
representations outperforms ranking LDA representations. While this approach is simple
and able to benefit from a potentially vast body of comparable versus parallel corpora for
training, random shuffling loses the precise local context windows exploited by
word2vec training (which parallel corpora would provide), effectively setting context
window size to the length of the entire document. The approach and experimental setup
otherwise follows the monolingual version of the authors’ method. Cross-lingual results for
CLEF 2001–2003 Ad-hoc English-Dutch show that the embedding approach outperforms
the unigram baseline and is comparable to the LDA baseline. As with monolingual results,
the mixture models perform better, with a cross-lingual three way mixture of unigram,
LDA, and embedding. No experiments are reported with parallel corpora for comparison,
which would be interesting for future work.
Mitra et al. (2016) and Nalisnick et al. (2016) propose the Dual Embedding Space
Model (DESM), writing that ‘‘a crucial detail often overlooked when using word2vec is
that there are two different sets of vectors ... IN and OUT embedding spaces [produced by
word2vec].... By default, word2vec discards WOUT at the end of training and outputs
only WIN...’’ In contrast, the authors retain both input and output embeddings. Nalisnick
et al. (2016) point out that within the same embedding space, either IN or OUT, the
neighbors are functionally similar words. However, the neighbors of a word represented
with its IN embedding vector in the OUT space, are topically similar words. Topically
similar words are likely to co-occur in a local context whereas functionally similar words
are likely to occur in similar contexts. For instance, for the term harvard, the terms faculty,
alumni, and graduate are topically similar terms and yale, stanford, cornell are functionally
similar terms. Motivated by this observation, Nalisnick et al. (2016) propose the DESM.
In the DESM, query terms are mapped to the IN space and document words to the OUT
space. Documents are embedded by taking an average (weighted by document term fre
quency) over embedding vectors of document terms. Query-document relevance is com
puted by average cosine similarity between each query term and the document embedding.
The authors induce word embeddings via word2vec CBOW only, though they note that
Skip-gram embeddings could be used interchangeably. Experiments with ad-hoc search are
carried out on a proprietary Web collection using both explicit and implicit relevance
judgments. In contrast with DSSM (Huang et al. 2013), full web page documents are
indexed instead of only page titles. DESM’s IN and OUT embedding space combinations are
compared to baseline retrieval by BM25 and latent semantic analysis (LSA) (Deerwester
et al. 1990). Out Of Vocabulary (OOV) query terms are ignored for the DESM approach
but retained for the baselines. Results show ‘‘DESM to be a poor standalone ranking signal
on a larger set of documents,’’ so a re-ranking approach is proposed in which the collection
is first pruned to all documents retrieved by an initial Bing search, and then re-ranked by
DESM. Re-ranking results show improvements over baselines, especially on the implicit
feedback test set, with best performance obtained when word embeddings are trained on
queries and using IN-OUT embedding spaces in document ranking. The authors surmise that
training on queries performs better due to users tending to include only significant terms
from their queries. Learned word embeddings are shared online (see Appendix ‘‘Word
embeddings’’).
In Ganguly et al. (2016), documents are modelled as a mixture distribution that gen
erates the observed terms in the document. Ganguly et al. (2016) estimate this distribution
with k-means clustering of embeddings of the terms in the document. The likelihood of a
123
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
135
query to be generated by the document is computed by the average inter-similarity of the
set of query terms to the centroids of clusters in the document, in the word embedding
space. For efficiency, the global vocabulary is clustered using word2vec embeddings in
advance and document specific clusters are created by grouping the terms according to
their global cluster ids. A centroid-based query likelihood function is evaluated in com
bination with language modeling with Jelinek-Mercer smoothing on the TREC 6-7-8 and
TREC Robust data sets. A significant improvement is observed by the inclusion of word
embedding-based query-likelihood function over the standalone language model (LM)
baseline.
Boytsov et al. (2016) consider the cosine similarity between the averaged word
embedding vectors of the query and document as a similarity function, in k-NN based
retrieval. The authors propose to replace the traditional term-based search by k-NN based
retrieval. Exact k-NN search fails to be efficient yet approximation algorithms, such as
Small-World Graph and Neighbourhood Approximations (NAPP), are proposed as reme
dies. Experiments are performed on the Yahoo Answers and Stack Overflow data sets. The
cosine-similarity between averaged word embeddings is found to be less effective than
BM25 and cosine similarity of TF-IDF vectors.
Implicit Zuccon et al. (2015) propose a Neural Translation Language Model (NLTM),
which integrates word embeddings into Berger and Lafferty (1999)’s classic translation
model approach to query-likelihood IR. They estimate the translation probability between
terms as the cosine similarity of the two terms divided by the sum of the cosine similarities
between the translating term and all of the terms in the vocabulary. Previous state-of-the
art translation models use mutual information (MI) embeddings to estimate translation
probabilities. Experiments evaluating NLTM on ad-hoc search are reported on the TREC
datasets AP87-88, WSJ87-92, DOTGOV, and MedTrack. Results indicate that NLTM
provides moderate improvements over the MI and classic TM systems, based on modest
improvements to a large number of topics, rather than large differences on a few topics.
Sensitivity analysis of the various model hyper-parameters for inducing word embeddings
shows that manipulations of embedding dimensionality, context window size, and model
objective (CBOW vs. Skip-gram) have no consistent impact upon NLTM’s performance
versus the baselines. Regarding the choice of training corpus for learning embeddings
versus search effectiveness, although effectiveness typically appears highest when
embeddings are estimated using the same collection in which search is to be performed, the
differences are not statistically significant. Source code and learned embeddings are shared
online (see Appendix ‘‘Word embeddings’’).
Rekabsaz et al. (2016b) investigate a set of existing models including Pivoted Docu
ment Normalization, BM25, BM25 Verboseness Aware, Multi-Aspect TF, and Language
Modeling by generalizing the translation model to the probabilistic relevance framework.
They extend the translation models in Pseudo-Relevance (PR) framework by integrating
the effect of changing term frequencies. For experimental evaluation 6 test collections are
used: a combination of TREC 1 to 3, TREC-6, TREC-7, and TREC-8 of the AdHoc track,
TREC-2005 HARD track, and CLEF eHealth 2015 Task 2 User-Centred Health Infor
mation Retrieval. In terms of baseline models, Rekabsaz et al use (1) the original version
of the extended models; (2) the query expanded model using the logarithm weighting
model; and (3) the query expanded model with the normalization over the expanded terms.
The evaluation metrics are MAP and NDCG@20. Experimental results show that the
newly proposed models achieve state-of-the-art results.
Cosine similarity of word2vec embeddings is used in a similar way in the Generalized
Language Model (GLM) (Ganguly et al. 2015). Ganguly et al. (2015) propose GLM for
123
136
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
integrating word embeddings with the query-likelihood language modelling. Semantic
similarity between query and document/collection terms is measured by cosine similarity
between word embeddings induced via word2vec CBOW. The authors frame their
approach in the context of classic global versus local term similarity, with word embed
dings trained without reference to queries representing a global approach akin to the Latent
Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) of Wei and Croft (2006). Like Rekabsaz et al. (2016a) and
Zuccon et al. (2015), the authors build on Berger and Lafferty (1999)’s ‘‘noisy channel’’
translation model. Smoothing of mixture model components resembles classic cluster
based LM smoothing of Liu and Croft (2004). Ad-hoc search results reported for TREC
6–8 and Robust using Lucene show improvements over both unigram query-likelihood and
LDA. However, the parameters appear to be tuned on the test collections, and LDA results
are much lower than Wei and Croft (2006)’s, which the authors hypothesize is due to
training LDA on the entire collection rather than on collection subsets. The authors do not
compare their global approach versus local pseudo-relevance feedback (PRF) (Lavrenko
and Croft 2001), which prior work has shown to outperform LDA (Yi and Allan 2009);
while typically a query-time technique, it can be approximated for greater efficiency
(Cartright et al. 2010).
Roy et al. (2016a) proposes a relevance feedback model that employs word embed
dings, based on the intuition that adding word embeddings can result in semantic com
position of individual words. They buid a kernel functions around the query word
embeddings that are treated as data points. Then they estimate the kernel density of the
probability density function that generates the query word embeddings. The query term can
control the shape of the estimated probability density function. In this way, they develop a
relevance feedback model that integrates semantic relationships and compositionality of
words. Documents are then ranked according to their KL divergence from the estimated
kernel density function. They evaluate their approach on TREC 6–8 and Robust adhoc
news retrieval and the TREC 9–10 WT10G web retrieval test collections. They compare
their method with the standard relevance model that only uses statistical co-occurrences
between query terms and words in top ranked documents, and find that it significantly
outperforms the baseline. A future direction might be exploring larger units embeddings
such as sentence and paragraph embeddings.
5.1.2 Learn
Learn to match
Representation Based The Deep Structured Semantic Model (DSSM) (Huang et al.
2013) is the earliest neural Representation Based Learn to match model for document
ranking. DSSM was one of the pioneering models incorporating click-through data in deep
NNs. It has been built on by a variety of others (Mitra 2015; Mitra and Craswell 2015;
Shen et al. 2014a, b; Ye et al. 2015). Other work in this category is either an architectural
variant of DSSM with different SCNs or they propose novel ways of using distributed
representations by DSSM variants in order to improve retrieval effectiveness. Architectural
variants such as the Convolutional Latent Semantic Model (CLSM) (Shen et al. 2014a) and
LSTM Deep Structured Semantic Model (LSTM-DSSM) (Palangi et al. 2014, 2016) differ
from DSSM in the input representations and architecture of the SCN component. Besides
architectural variants with different SCN types, Nguyen et al. (2016) propose two high
level views of how to incorporate a knowledge base (KB) graph into DSSM (Huang et al.
2013). Li et al. (2014) utilize distributed representations produced by DSSM and CLSM in
order to re-rank documents based on in-session contextual information. Ye et al. (2015)
123
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
137
question the assumptions about clicked query-document pairs in order to derive triplets for
training variants of the DSSM models.
The SCN of the DSSM model is composed of a deep neural network with three non
linear layers placed on top of a word hashing layer. Documents are indexed only by title
text rather than the entire body text. The query and the document are first modeled as two
high dimensional term vectors (i.e., a bag-of-words representation). Each term vector is
mapped to a trigram vector by the word hashing layer, in order to cope with a large
vocabulary. For instance, the word vector is mapped to {.ve, vec, ect, cto, tor ,or.} where
the dot sign is used as the start and end character. This low-dimensional trigram vector is
then considered as input to the SCN. The vocabulary size is reduced from 500K to 30K by
replacing each term with its letter trigrams. Trigram hashing also helps to address out of
vocabulary (OOV) query terms not seen in training data. The authors do not discuss how to
mitigate hashing collisions; while they show that such collisions are relatively rare (e.g.,
0:0044% for the 500K vocabulary size), this stems in part from indexing document titles
only.
Convolutional Deep Structured Semantic Models (C-DSSM) (Shen et al. 2014b) extend
DSSM by introducing a CNN with max-pooling as the SCN in the DSSM architecture (C
DSSM). It first uses word hashing to transform each word into a vector. A convolutional
layer then projects each word vector within a context window to a local contextual feature
vector. It also incorporates a max-pooling layer to extract the most salient local features to
form a fixed-length global feature vector for queries and web documents. The main
motivation for the max-pooling layer is that because the overall meaning of a sentence is
often determined by a few key words, simply mixing all words together (e.g., by summing
over all local feature vectors) may introduce unnecessary divergence and hurt overall
semantic representation effectiveness. This is a key difference between DSSM and
C-DSSM.
Both DSSM (Huang et al. 2013) and C-DSSM (Shen et al. 2014b) fail to capture
contextual information of queries and documents. To address this, Shen et al. (2014a)
propose a Convolutional Latent Semantic Model (CLSM) built on top of DSSM. CLSM
captures contextual information by a series of projections from one layer to another in a
CNN architecture (LeCun and Bengio 1995). The first layer consists of a word n-gram
followed by a letter trigram layer where each word n-gram is composed of its trigram
representation, a form of word hashing technique developed in DSSM. Then, a convolution
layer transforms these trigrams into contextual feature vectors using the convolution matrix
Wc, which is shared among all word n-grams. Max-pooling is then performed against each
dimension on a set of contextual feature vectors. This generates the global sentence level
feature vector v. Finally, using the non-linear transformation tanh and the semantic pro
jection matrix Ws, they compute the final latent semantic vector for the query/document.
The parameters Wc and Ws are optimized to maximize the same loss function used by
Huang et al. (2013) for DSSM. Even though CLSM introduces word n-grams to capture
contextual information, it suffers from the same problems as DSSM, including scalability.
For example, CLSM performs worse when trained on a whole document than when trained
on only the document title (Guo et al. 2016a).
To sum up the architectural variants, DSSM takes a term vector of the textual unit and
treats it as a bag of words. In contrast, C-DSSM, CLSM and LSTM-DSSM take a sequence
of one-hot vectors of terms and treat the TTUs as a sequence of words. CLSM includes a
convolutional neural network and LSTM-DSSM includes an LSTM network as SCN. The
word hashing layer is common to all of these models. DSSM, CLSM and LSTM-DSSM are
evaluated on large-scale data sets from Bing in Huang et al. (2013), Shen et al. (2014a, b).
123
138
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
In Huang et al. (2013), DSSM is trained on document title-query pairs and is shown to
outperform the Word Translation Model, BM25, TF-IDF and Bilingual Topic Models with
posterior regularization in terms of NDCG at cutoff values 1, 3 and 10. However, later
work Guo et al. (2016a) performs two further experiments with DSSM: indexing only
document titles versus indexing entire documents (i.e., full-text search). Guo et al.
(2016a)’s results indicate that full-text search with DSSM does not perform as well as
traditional IR models. In Shen et al. (2014a), CLSM is shown to be more effective with
document titles. Finally, Shen et al. (2014a) and Palangi et al. (2016) report that CLSM
outperforms DSSM and LSTM-DSSM outperforms CLSM when document titles are used
instead of full documents.
Liu et al. (2015) propose a neural model with multi-task objectives. The model inte
grates a deep neural network for query classification and the DSSM model for web doc
ument ranking via shared layers. The word hashing layer and semantic representation layer
of DSSM are shared between the two models. The integrated network comprises separate
task-specific semantic representation layers and output layers for two different tasks. A
separate cost function is defined for each task. During training, in each iteration, a task is
selected randomly and the model is updated only according to the selected cost function.
The proposed model is evaluated on large-scale commercial search logs. Experimental
results show improvements by the integrated model over both standalone deep neural
networks for query classification and a standalone DSSM for web search ranking.
Li et al. (2014) utilize distributed representations produced by DSSM and CLSM in
order to re-rank documents based on in-session contextual information. Similarity of
query-query and query-document pairs extracted from the session context is computed
using DSSM and CLSMvectors. These similarity scores are included as additional features
to represent session context in a context-aware learning to rank framework. They evaluate
XCode (internally developed by the authors), DSSM (Huang et al. 2013), and C-DSSM
(Shen et al. 2014b) as models for deriving these contextual features and find that DSSM
offers the highest performance, followed by C-DSSM. Though they expected C-DSSM to
offer the highest performance, they note that C-DSSM could only be trained on a small
dataset with bounded size, in contrast to DSSM, which could be trained on a larger dataset.
Additionally, they note that observed performance differences may be due to imperfect
tuning of model parameters, such as sliding window size for C-DSSM. Nevertheless,
contextual features derived using both DSSM and C-DSSM offer performance benefits for
re-ranking.
Nguyen et al. (2016) propose two high level views of how to incorporate a knowledge
base (KB) graph into a ranking model like DSSM (Huang et al. 2013). To the best of our
knowledge, this is one of the first IR studies that tries to incorporate KBs into a deep neural
structure. The authors’ first model exploits KBs to enhance the representation of a docu
ment-query pair and its similarity score by exploiting concept embeddings learned from the
KB distributed representation (Faruqui et al. 2014; Xu et al. 2014) as input to deep NNss
like DSSM. The authors argue that this hybrid representation of the distributional
semantics (namely, word embeddings) and the symbolic semantics (namely, concept
embeddings taking into account the graph structure) would enhance document-query
matching. Their second model uses the knowledge resource as an intermediate component
that helps to translate the deep representation of the query towards the deep representation
of documents for an ad-hoc IR task. Strong empirical evidence is still needed to demon
strate that adding a KB does in indeed benefit the deep neural architecture for capturing
semantic similarity.
123
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
139
Ye et al. (2015) question assumptions about clicked query-document pairs in order to
derive triplets for training DSSM variant models. According to Ye et al. (2015) these three
assumptions are: (1) each clicked query-document pair is equally weighted; (2) each
clicked query-document pair is a 100% positive example; and (3) each click is solely due
to semantic similarity. The authors relax these assumption and propose two generalized
extensions to DSSM: GDSSM1 and GDSSM2. While DSSM models the probability of a
document being clicked given a query and the semantic similarity between document and
query, GDSSM1 uses more information in its loss function, incorporating the number of
users seeing and the proportion clicking for each query-document pair. GDSSM2 condi
tions on lexical similarity in addition to semantic similarity.
Interaction Based Guo et al. (2016a)’s Deep Relevance Matching Model (DRMM) is
one of the first NN IR models to show improvement over traditional IR models (though the
comparison is against bag-of-words approaches rather than term proximity baselines). The
authors hypothesize that deep learning methods developed and/or commonly applied in
NLP for semantic matching may not be suited for ad-hoc search, which is most concerned
with relevance matching. They articulate three key differences they perceive between
semantic and relevance matching:
1. Semantic matching looks for semantic similarity between terms; relevance matching
puts more emphasis on exact matching.
2. Semantic matching is often concerned with how composition and grammar help to
determine meaning; varying importance among query terms is more crucial than
grammar in relevance matching.
3. Semantic matching compares two whole texts in their entirety; relevance matching
might only compare parts of a document to a query.
The raw inputs to the DRMM are term embeddings. The first layer consists of matching
histograms of each query term’s cosine similarity scores with each of the document terms.
On top of this histogram layer is an NN outputting a single node for each query term. These
outputs are multiplied by query term importance weights calculated by a term gating
network and then summed to produce the final predicted matching score for the
query/document pair. The whole network is trained using a margin ranking loss function.
Ad-hoc search experiments are reported on TREC Robust04 and ClueWeb09-Cat-B.
Baselines include: (1) traditional retrieval models such as BM25 and query likelihood;
(2) representation-focused NN models, including DSSM (Huang et al. 2013) and C-DSSM
(Shen et al. 2014b) (indexing titles vs. full documents), ARC-I (Hu et al. 2014); and
(3) interaction-focused NN models, such as ARC-II (Hu et al. 2014) and MatchPyramid
(Pang et al. 2016b). OOV terms are represented by random vectors (as in Kenter and
de Rijke 2015), effectively allowing only exact matching. Results show that as the CBOW
dimension increases (50, 100, 300 and 500), the performance of DRRM first increases then
slightly drops. DRRM using IDF and Log-Count Histogram (LCH) also significantly
outperforms all baselines. In addition, none of the representation-focused and interaction
focused baselines are competitive with traditional retrieval models, supporting the authors’
hypothesis that deep matching models focused on semantic matching may not be well
suited to ad-hoc search.
5.1.3 Learn to predict
Ai et al. (2016a, b) investigate the use of the PV-DBOW model as a document language
model for retrieval. Three shortcomings of the PV-DBOW model are identified and an
123
140
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
extended Paragraph Vector (PV) model is proposed with remedies for these shortcomings.
First, the PV-DBOW model is found to be biased towards short documents due to over
fitting in training and the training objective is updated with L2 regularization. Secondly,
the PV-DBOW model trained with NEG implicitly weights terms with respect to Inverse
Corpus Frequencies (ICF) which has been shown to be inferior to Inverse Document
Frequency (IDF) in Robertson (2004). A document frequency based negative sampling
strategy, which converts the problem into factorization of a shifted TF-IDF matrix, is
adopted. Thirdly, the two layer PV-DBOW architecture depicted in Fig. 11a is introduced
since word substitution relations, such as the relation in car-vehicle, underground-subway
pairs, are not captured by PV-DBOW. The Extended Paragraph Vector (EPV) is evaluated
in re-ranking the set of top 2000 documents retrieved by a query likelihood retrieval
function. Document language models based on EPV and LDA are compared on TREC
Robust04 and GOV2 data sets. An EPV-based model yields higher effectiveness scores
than the LDA-based model.
The Hierarchical Document Vector (HDV) (Djuric et al. 2015) model extends the PV
DM model to predict not only words in a document but also its temporal neighbors in a
document stream. The architecture of this model is depicted in Fig. 11b with a word
context and document context size of five. There, w1, w2, w3, w4, w5 represent a sample
context of words from the input paragraph; p1, p2, p3, p4, p5 represent a set of documents
that occur in the same context. In HDV, the content of the documents in the temporal
context also contributes to the document representation. Similar to PV-DM, the words and
documents are mapped to d-dimensional embedding vectors. Djuric et al. (2015) point out
that words and documents are embedded in the same space and this makes the model useful
for both recommendation and retrieval tasks including document retrieval, document
recommendation, document tag recommendation and keyword suggestion. Given a key
word, titles of similar documents in the embedding space are presented to give an idea of
(a)
w1
w2
w4
E-Lookup
w3
D-Lookup
p
w5
(b)
p1
p2
p4
p5
w3
D-Lookup
p3
E-Lookup
w1
w2
w4
w5
Fig. 11 Learn to predict context models for document retrieval. a Two Layer PV-DBOW (Ai et al. 2016a).
b HDV (Djuric et al. 2015) (and context-content2vec Grbovic et al. 2015b, Section 8.2)
123
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
141
the effectiveness of the model on the ad-hoc retrieval task. However, a quantitative
evaluation is not provided for the document retrieval and keyword suggestion tasks.
5.1.4 Learn to generate
Lioma et al. (2016) ask whether it is possible to generate relevant documents given a
query. A character level LSTM network is optimized to generate a synthetic document.
The network is fed with a sequence of words constructed by concatenating the query and
context windows around query terms in all relevant documents for the query. For each
query, a separate model is generated and a synthetic document is generated for the same
query with the learned model. The synthetic document was evaluated in a crowdsourcing
setting. Users are provided with four word clouds that belong to three known relevant
documents and the synthetic document. Each word cloud is built by selection of top
frequent terms from the document. Users are asked to select the most relevant word cloud.
Author report that the word cloud of the synthetic document ranked the first or second for
most of the queries. Experiments were performed on the TREC Disks 4, 5 test collection
with title-only queries from TREC 6, 7, 8.
5.2 Query re-weighting
5.2.1 Aggregate
Implicit Palakodety and Callan (2014)’s work on query expansion is based on word
embeddings; although originally proposed for result merging in federated web search, we
note it here since it introduces the idea of an importance vector in the query re-weighting
method in Zheng and Callan (2015). Palakodety and Callan (2014) represent a query by the
mean vector of query term embeddings and k-nearest neighbors of the query vector are
selected to expand the query. Expansion terms are re-weighted with respect to their dis
tance to the query vector. A query term that is more distant to the query vector is assumed
to contain more information and is assigned a higher weight. Query re-weighting is
modelled as a linear regression problem from importance vectors to term weights in Zheng
and Callan (2015). The importance vector, which is the offset between the query vector and
the term vector, is used as the feature vector for the query term. A linear regression model
is trained using the ground-truth term weights computed by term recall weights which is
the ratio of relevant documents that contain the query term t to the total number of relevant
documents to the query q. Weighted queries based on a learned regression model are
evaluated in a retrieval setting and compared against the LM and BM-25 models using the
data sets ROBUST04, WT10g, GOV2, ClueWeb09B. Two variants of the model, DeepTR
BOW and DeepTR-SD, are compared against unweighted queries, sequential dependency
models and weighted sequential dependency models. Statistically significant improve
ments are observed at high precision levels and throughout the rankings compared to the
first two methods.
123
142
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
5.3 Query expansion
5.3.1 Aggregate
Explicit ALMasri et al. (2016) propose a heuristic method VEXP for term-by-term query
expansion using embedding vectors. For each query term, the most similar terms in the
embedding space are added to the query. Expansion terms are weighted in proportion to
their frequency in the expanded query. Experiments with ad-hoc search use Indri on four
CLEF medical test collections: Image2010–2012 (short documents and queries, text-only)
and Case2011 (long documents and queries). Baselines include pseudo-relevance feedback
(Lavrenko and Croft 2001) and mutual information. They evaluate both CBOW and Skip
gram word2vec embeddings (using default dimensionality and context window settings)
but present only Skip-gram results, noting ‘‘there was no big difference in retrieval per
formance between the two.’’ The authors consider adding a fixed number of 1–10
expansion terms per query term and also compare two smoothing methods: linear Jelineck
Mercer versus Dirichlet. Results show VEXP achieves higher Mean Average Precision
(MAP) than other methods.
Roy et al. (2016b) propose a set of query expansion methods, based on selecting
k nearest neighbors of the query terms in the word embedding space and ranking these
terms with respect to their similarity to the whole query. For each nearest neighbor, they
calculate the average cosine similarity versus all query terms, selecting the top-K terms
according to average cosine score. The second approach (reduces the vocabulary space
considered by k-NN by only considering terms appearing in the top M pseudo-relevant
documents retrieved by the query. In the third approach, an iterative (and computationally
expensive) pruning strategy is applied to reduce the number of nearest neighbors, assuming
that nearest neighbors are similar to one another. All expansion methods yielded lower
effectiveness scores than a statistical co-occurrence based feedback method, in experi
ments with the TREC 6, 7 and 8 and TREC Robust data set and the LM with Jelinek
Mercer smoothing as the retrieval function.
Amer et al. (2016) investigate word embeddings for personalized query expansion in
the domain of social book search.4 While personalized query expansion is not new (Carmel
et al. 2009; Chirita et al. 2007), use of word embeddings for personalization is novel. The
proposed method consists of three steps: user modeling, term filtering and selection of
expansion terms. A user is modeled as a collection of documents, and query terms are
filtered to remove adjectives, which may lead to noisy expansion terms. For each
remaining query term, similar to Roy et al. (2016b)’s k-NN approach, the top-K most
similar terms are selected based on cosine similarity in the embedding space. Evaluation on
the social book search task compares word2vec trained on personalized versus non
personalized training sets. However, results show that expansion via word embeddings
strictly hurts performance versus no expansion at all, in contrast to Mitra and Craswell
(2015), Roy et al. (2016b). This may stem from training word2vec embeddings only on
social book search documents. Results further suggest that personalized query expansion
does not provide improvements over non-personalized query expansion using word
embedding. The authors postulate that sparse training data for personalization is the main
problem here.
Rekabsaz et al. (2016a) recommend choosing similar terms based on a global similarity
threshold rather than by k-NN because some terms should naturally have more similar
4 http://social-book-search.humanities.uva.nl.
123
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
143
terms than others. They choose the threshold by setting it such that for any term, the
expected number of related terms within the threshold is equal to the average number of
synonyms over all words in the language. This method avoids having to constrain or prune
the k-NN technique as in Roy et al. (2016b). They use multiple initializations of the
word2vec Skip-gram model to produce a probability distribution used to calculate the
expected cosine similarity, making the measure more robust against noise. Experiments on
TREC 6–8 and HARD 2005 incorporate this threshold-setting method into a translation
language model (Berger and Lafferty 1999) for ad-hoc retrieval and compare against both a
language model baseline and a translation language model that uses k-NN to select similar
words. The threshold-based translation language model achieves the highest Mean Aver
age Precision (MAP).
Implicit In Diaz et al. (2016), Zamani and Croft (2016a), word embeddings are used for
defining a new query language model (QLM). A QLM specifies a probability distribution
pðw j qÞ over all terms in the vocabulary. In query expansion with language modeling, the
top m terms w that have the highest pðw j qÞ value are selected as expansion terms
(Carpineto and Romano 2012). Diaz et al. (2016), propose a query expansion language
model based on word embeddings learned from topic-constrained corpora. When word
embeddings are learned from a topically-unconstrained corpora, they can be very general.
Therefore, a query language model is defined based on word embeddings learned using a
subset of documents sampled from a multinomial created by applying softmax on KL
divergence scores of all documents in the corpus. The original query language model is
interpolated with the query expansion language model which is defined by weights of
terms computed by the UUTq where U is the jVj d dimensional embedding matrix and q
is the jVj 1 dimensional term matrix. Locally-trained embeddings are compared against
global embeddings on TREC12, Robust and ClueWeb 2009 Category B Web corpus. Local
embeddings are shown to yield higher NDCG@10 scores. Besides the local and global
option, the authors also investigate the effect of using the target corpus versus an external
corpus for learning word embeddings. A topically-constrained set of documents sampled
from a general-purpose large corpus achieves the highest effectiveness scores.
Zamani and Croft (2016a) propose two separate QLMs and an extended relevance
model (Lavrenko and Croft 2001) based on word embeddings. In the first QLM, pðw j qÞ is
computed by multiplying likelihood scores pðw j tÞ given individual query terms whereas
in the second QLM, pðw j qÞ is estimated by an additive model over pðw j tÞ scores. The
pðw j tÞ scores are based on similarity of word embeddings. For measuring similarity of
embeddings, a sigmoid function is applied on top of the cosine similarity in order to
increase the discriminative ability. The reason for this choice is the observation that the
cosine similarity of the 1000th closest neighbor to a word is not much lower than the
similarity of the first closest neighbor. Besides the QLMs, a relevance model (Lavrenko
and Croft 2001), which computes a feedback query language model using embedding
similarities in addition to term matching, is introduced. The proposed query language
models are compared to Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE), GLM (Ganguly et al.
2015; ALMasri et al. 2016) on AP, Robust and GOV2 collections from TREC. The first
QLM is shown to be more effective in query expansion experiments. Regarding the PRF
experiments, the embedding based relevance model combined with expansion using the
first QLM produces the highest scores.
Zamani and Croft (2016b) develop a method for query embedding based on the
embedding vectors of its individual words. The intuitiion is that a good query vector should
yield a probability distribution Pðw j qÞ¼dðw;qÞ=Z induced over the vocabulary terms
123
144
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
similar to the query language model probability distribution (as measured by the KL
Divergence). Here, w is the embedding vector of the word, q is the query embedding
vector, dðw;qÞ is the similarity between the two embedding vectors, and Z is a normal
ization constant. For similarity, they use the softmax and sigmoid transformations of cosine
similarity. They show that the common heuristic of averaging individual query term
vectors to induce the overall query embedding is actually a special case of their proposed
theoretical framework for the case when vector similarity is measured by softmax and the
query language model is estimated by maximum likelihood. Experiments with ad-hoc
search using Galago are reported for three TREC test collections: AP, Robust04, and
GOV2, using keyword TREC title queries. Word embeddings are induced by GloVe
(Pennington et al. 2014). The GloVe are trained from a 6 billion token collection (Wiki
pedia 2014 plus Gigawords 5). Two different methods are used for estimating the query
language model: via Pseudo Relevance Feedback (PRF) (Lavrenko and Croft 2001), which
they refer to as pseudo query vector (PQV), and via maximum-likelihood estimation
(MLE). Two methods are used for calculating similarity: softmax and sigmoid. Softmax is
easy to use because of the closed form solution, but the sigmoid function consistently
showed better performance, likely due to the flexibility provided by its two free parame
ters. Although PQV shows higher mean average precision, precision of top documents
appears to suffer. Results also emphasize the importance of training data selection.
Embeddings trained from the same domain as the documents being searched perform better
than embeddings trained on a larger dataset from a different domain.
5.3.2 Learn
5.3.3 Learn to autoencode
Gupta et al. (2014) explore query expansion in mixed-script IR (MSIR), a task in which
documents and queries in non-Roman written languages can contain both native and
transliterated scripts together. Stemming from the observation that transliterations gener
ally use Roman letters in such a way as to preserve the original-language pronunciation,
the authors develop a method to convert both scripts into a bilingual embedding space.
Therefore, they convert terms into feature vectors of the count of each Roman letter. An
auto-encoder is then trained for query expansion by feeding in the concatenated native
term feature vector and transliterated term feature vector. The output is the low-dimen
sional embedding in the abstract space. The training of the autoencoder includes greedy
layer-wise pretraining and fine-tuning through backpropagation. Experiments are con
ducted on shared task data from FIRE (see Appendix ‘‘Test corpora used for retrieval
experiments’’). Results suggest that their method significantly outperforms other state-of
the-art methods. Source code for the model is shared online (see Appendix ‘‘Publicly
available implementations of existing neural IR models’’).
5.3.4 Learn to match
Sordoni et al. (2014) propose a supervised Quantum Entropy Minimization (QEM)
approach for finding semantic representations of concepts, such as words or phrases, for
query expansion. The authors suggest that text sequences should not lie in the same
semantic space as single terms because their information content is higher. To this end,
concepts are embedded in rank-one matrices while queries and documents are embedded as
a mixture of rank-one matrices. This allows documents and queries to lie in a larger space
123
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
145
and carry more semantic information than concepts, thereby achieving greater semantic
resolution. For learning parameters of density matrices, QEM’s gradient updates are a
refinement of updates in both Bai et al. (2009)’s Supervised Semantic Indexing (SSI) and
Rocchio (1971); a query concept embedding moves toward the embeddings of relevant
documents’ concepts and away from the embeddings of non-relevant documents’ concepts.
This has the effect of selecting which document concepts the query concept should be
aligned with and also leads to a refinement of Rocchio: the update direction for query
expansion is obtained by weighting relevant and non-relevant documents according to their
similarity to the query. Due to lack of public query logs, QEM is trained on Wikipedia
anchor logs (Dang and Croft 2010). Experiments conducted on ClueWeb09-Cat-B with
TREC 2010–2012 Web Track topics show QEM outperforms Gao et al. (2010)’s concept
translation model (CTM) (statistically significant differences), and SSI (occasionally sta
tistically significant differences). QEM notably achieves improved precision at top-ranks.
Also notable is QEM’s ability to find useful expansion terms for longer queries due to
higher semantic resolution. Additional preliminary experiments with Weston et al.
(2010)’s Weighted Approximate-Rank Pairwise loss yields further improvements for QEM
over baselines.
5.4 Result diversification
5.4.1 Aggregate
Explicit Onal et al. (2015) propose to utilize GloVe embeddings in order to overcome the
vocabulary gap between various TTU pairs, such as tweet-tweet, query-tweet and aspect
tweet pairs, in tweet search result diversification. Diversification algorithms rely on textual
similarity functions in order to select the optimal set of results that maximizes both novelty
and relevance. Exact matching functions fail to distinguish the aspects expressed with very
short textual content. TTUs are expanded with k nearest neighbors of the terms in the
GloVe embedding space. As similarity functions cannot distinguish details at the aspect
level, marginal improvement are not observed in a-NDCG scores when explicit and
implicit diversification algorithms are run with the expanded TTUs.
5.4.2 Learn
Learn to match Prior state-of-the-art methods for diversifying search results include the
Relational Learning-to-Rank framework (R-LTR) (Zhu et al. 2014) and the Perceptron
Algorithm using Measures as Margins (PAMM) (Xia et al. 2015). These prior methods
either use a heuristic ranking model based on a predefined document similarity function, or
they automatically learn a ranking model from predefined novelty features often based on
cosine similarity. In contrast, Xia et al. (2016) take automation a step further, using Neural
Tensor Networks (NTN) to learn the novelty features themselves. The NTN architecture
was first proposed to model the relationship between entities in a knowledge graph via a
bilinear tensor product (Socher et al. 2013). The model here takes a document and a set of
other documents as input. The architecture uses a tensor layer, a max-pooling layer, and a
linear layer to output a document novelty score. The NTN augmentations of R-LTR and
PAMM perform at least as well as those baselines, showing how the NTN can remove the
need for manual design of functions and features. It is not clear yet whether using a full
tensor network works much better than just using a single slice of the tensor.
123
146
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
5.5 Expertise retrieval
5.5.1 Learn
Learn to predict Van Gysel et al. (2016b) propose an unsupervised discriminative log
linear model for the retrieval of the authors with the most expertise, given a topic as the
query. Contextual relations to be used for training are derived from the author-document
relations. Authors split each document into n-grams and compute probability distribution
of authors given an n-gram. The training objective is to optimize the cross-entropy between
the predicted distribution and the oracle distribution derived from the contextual relations,
over the collection of n-grams. The neural model is a single layer neural network which
takes a word as the input and predicts a probability distribution over the authors. The
probability of an author given a sequence of words is computed by the multiplication of the
probability values given each word, assuming conditional independence of expertise given
words. Word embeddings and the author embeddings are learned jointly. The proposed
log-linear model is shown to outperform the state-of-the-art vector space-based entity
ranking and language modeling approaches, in terms of precision, in experiments on the
TREC Enterprise Track 2005–2008 data sets and a University of Tilburg dataset. The
authors note the need for improving the scalability of the model with respect to the number
of authors.
5.6 Product search
5.6.1 Learn
Learn to match Van Gysel et al. (2016a) describe a Latent Semantic Entities (LSE)
method for learning a latent space model for product entity retrieval. Products are entities
that are each associated with a text description accompanied by user reviews. LSE is a
discriminative model that predicts probability distributions over a collection of product
entities given a descriptive text. The LSE model comprises a word embedding matrix, an
entity embedding matrix and a mapping from words to entities. Word embeddings and
entity embeddings are learned jointly. Word embeddings and entity embeddings have
different dimensionality. For a given textual description, embedding of the predicted entity
is computed by a hidden neural network over the average of word embeddings. The
objective function maximizes similarity between the predicted and actual entity embed
dings while minimizing similarity between the predicted embeddings and randomly
sampled negative instances. For scalability, NCE is used to approximate the probability
distribution over the products. Although this work is classified as Learn to match due to the
training objective, embeddings for a fixed collection products are learned. As an outlier in
the Learn to match category, the input to the model is not a pair of textual units. One
element of the pair is a product-id. Experiments are conducted on Amazon product data,
comparing NDCG scores against three baseline methods including LSI, Latent Dirichlet
Allocation (LDA), and word2vec. In all four product domains from the dataset, LSE
outperforms baselines over all tested entity dimensionality sizes. LSE is also found to
provide useful additional features to a Query-likelihood Language Model in learning-to
rank experiments.
123
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
147
6 Query tasks
6.1 Query auto completion
6.1.1 Aggregate
Implicit The work by Cai and de Rijke (2016a) on query auto completion introduces
semantic features computed using Skip-Gram embeddings, for learning to rank query auto
completion candidates. Query similarity computed by sum and maximum of the embed
ding similarity of term-pairs from queries are used as two separate features. The maximal
embedding similarity of term pairs is found to be the most important feature in a diverse
feature set including popularity-based features, a lexical similarity and another semantic
similarity feature based on co-occurrence of term pairs in sessions.
6.1.2 Learn
Learn to match The Convolutional Latent Semantic Model (CLSM) has been used to learn
distributed representations of query reformulations (Mitra 2015) and of queries (Mitra and
Craswell 2015). In both studies, CLSM representations are used to build additional features
in an existing learning to rank framework for query auto completion.
Mitra (2015) learns embedding vectors for query reformulation based on query logs,
representing query reformulation as a vector using CLSM. In Mitra (2015), a CLSM model
is trained on query pairs that are observed in succession in search logs. This work provides
an analysis of CLSM vectors for queries similar to the word embedding space analysis in
Mikolov et al. (2013c). Mitra (2015) found that offsets between CLSM query vectors can
represent intent transition patterns. To illustrate, the nearest neighbor query of the vector
computed by vectorðuniversityofwashingtonÞ vectorðseattleÞþvectorðchicagoÞ is found
to be vectorðuniversityofchicagoÞ. Besides, the offset of the vectors for
universityofwashington and seattle is similar to the offset of the vectors for
chicagostateuniversity and chicago. Motivated by this feature of the CLSM vectors, query
reformulations are represented as the offset vector from the source query to target query
(Mitra 2015). Clustering of query reformulations represented by the offset vectors yields
clusters that contain pairs with similar intent transitions. For instance, the query refor
mulations in which there is an intent jump like avatar dragons ! facebook, are observed
grouped in a cluster. Two sets of features are then developed. The first feature set captures
topical similarity via cosine similarity between the candidate embedding vector and
embedding vectors of some past number of queries in the same session. The second set of
reformulation features captures the difference between the candidate embedding vector
and that of the immediately preceding query. Other features used include non-contextual
features, such as most popular completion, as well as contextual features, such as n-gram
similarity features and pairwise frequency features. LambdaMART (Wu et al. 2010) is
trained on click-through data and features. Results suggest that embedding features give
considerable improvement over Most Probable Completion (MPC) (Bar-Yossef and Kraus
2011), in addition to other models lacking the embedding-based features.
Whereas popularity query auto completion methods perform well for head queries having
abundant training data, prior methods often fail to recommend completions for tail queries
having less usual prefixes, including both probabilistic algorithms (Bar-Yossef and Kraus
2011; Cai et al. 2014; Shokouhi and Radinsky 2012) and learning-based QAC approaches
123
148
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
(Cai and de Rijke 2016a; Jiang et al. 2014). To address this, Mitra and Craswell (2015)
develop a query auto-completion procedure for such rare prefixes which enables query auto
completion even for query prefixes never seen intraining.The authorsminethemostpopular
query suffixes (e.g., n-grams that appear at the end of a query) and append them to the user
query prefixes, thus generating possible synthetic candidate solutions. To recommend pos
sible query expansion, they use LambdaMART (Wu et al. 2010) with two sets of ranking
features. The first feature set is the frequency of query n-grams in the search log. The second
feature set is generated by training CLSM on the prefix-suffixdataset,samplingqueriesinthe
search logs and segmenting each query at every possible wordboundary.ResultsontheAOL
search log show significant improvements over MPC (Bar-Yossef and Kraus 2011). The
authors also find n-gram features to be more important than CLSM features in contributing to
overall model performance.
6.2 Query suggestions
6.2.1 Learn to generate
We know of no work using RNNs for query suggestion prior to Hierarchical Recurrent
Encoder Decoder (HRED) by Sordoni et al. (2015) that trains a hierarchical GRU model to
generate context-aware suggestions. They first use a GRU layer to encode thequeries in each
session into vector representations, then build another GRU layer on sequences of query
vectors in a session and encode the session into a vector representation. The model learns its
parameters by maximizing the log-likelihood of observed query sessions. To generate query
suggestions, the model uses a GRU decoder on each word conditioned on both the previous
words generated and the previous queries in the same session. The model estimates the
likelihood of a query suggestion given the previous query. A learning-to-rank system is
trained to rank query suggestions, incorporating the likelihood score of each suggestion as a
feature. Results on the AOL query log show that the proposed approach outperforms several
baselines that use only hand-crafted features. The model is also seen to be robust when the
previous query is noisy. The authors then conduct a user study to evaluate the synthetic
suggestions generated by the HRED model.Users are asked to classify the suggested queries
as useful, somewhat useful, not useful categories. A total of 64% of the queries generated by
the HRED model was found to be either useful or somewhat useful by users. This score is
higher than all the other baselines where the highest score for ‘‘useful or somewhat useful’’ is
about 45%. Because the model can generate synthetic queries, it can effectively handle long
tail queries. However, only previous queries from the same session are used to provide the
contextual query suggestion; the authors do not utilize click-through data from previous
sessions. Because click-through data provides important feedback for synthetic query sug
gestions, incorporating such click-through data from previous sessions represents a possible
direction for future work.
6.3 Query classification
6.3.1 Aggregate
Explicit Using data from the KDD Cup 2005 Task,5 Zamani and Croft (2016b) propose an
embedding method for categorizing queries. See Sect. 5.1.1 for a description of Zamani
5 http://www.kdd.org/kdd-cup/view/kdd-cup-2005.
123
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
149
and Croft (2016b)’s overall method and results for ad-hoc search. For query classification,
given an item from the training data query-category, the authors first calculate the centroid
vector of all query embedding vectors under a category. Then for a test query, they use the
query embedding form and calculate the distance to the K nearest neighbor centroid vector.
Finally, they use a softmax function over the set of calculated distances to determine the
final set of categories for the test query. Because only embedding-based baselines are
included in the evaluation, it is unclear how the proposed approach would perform versus
traditional IR models.
6.4 Proactive search
6.4.1 Learn to generate
In the only work we know of investigating Neural IR for proactive retrieval, Luukkonen
et al. (2016) propose LSTM-based text prediction for query expansion. Intended to better
support proactive intelligent agents such as Apple’s Siri, Ok Google, etc., the LSTM is
used to generate sequences of words based on all previous words written by users. A beam
search is used to prune out low probability sequences. Finally, words remaining in the
pruned tree are used for query expansion. They evaluate their method on the abstracts of
the Computer Science branch of the arXiv preprint database, downlaoded on October 28,
2015. Experimental results show that the proposed method can proactively generate rel
evant resources and improve retrieval precision. The authors provide several possible
future directions, such as using the model to automatically suggest different continuations
for user text as it is written, as done in the Reactive Keyboard (Darragh et al. 1990) and
akin to query auto completion in search engines. User studies are also needed to test the
system’s effectiveness in the context of users’ real-world tasks.
7 Question answering
7.1 Answer sentence selection
7.1.1 Learn to match
Methods proposed in this section all evaluate on Wang et al. (2007)’s dataset derived from
TRECQA8–13.WangandNyberg (2015) use a stacked bi-directional LSTM (BLSTM) to
read a question and answer sequentially and then combine the hidden memory vectors from
LSTMs of both question and answer. They use mean, sum and max-pooling as features.
This model needs to incorporate key-word matching as a feature to outperform previous
approaches that do not utilize deep learning. They use BM25 as the key-word matching
feature and use Gradient boosted regression tree (GBDT) (Friedman 2001) to combine it
with the LSTM model.
To rank pairs of short texts, Severyn and Moschitti (2015) propose a Convolutional
Deep Neural Network (CDNN). Their deep learning architecture has 2 stages. The first
stage is a sentence embedding model using a CNN to embed question and answer sen
tences into intermediate representative vectors, which are used to compute their similarity.
The second stage is a NN ranking model whose features include intermediate represen
tative sentence vectors, similarity score, and some additional features such as word overlap
123
150
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
between sentences. Results show improvements of about 3.5% in MAP versus results
reported by Yu et al. (2014), in which a CNN is used followed by logistic regression (LR)
to rank QA pairs. The authors attribute this improvement to the larger width (of 5) of the
convolutional filter in their CNN for capturing long term dependencies, versus the unigram
and bigram models used by Yu et al. (2014). Beyond the similarity score, their second
stage NN also takes intermediate question and answer representations as features to con
stitute a much richer representation than that of Yu et al. (2014).
Yang et al. (2016b)’s approach starts by considering the interaction between question
and answer at the word embedding level. They first build a question-answer interaction
matrix using pre-trained embeddings. They then use a novel value-shared weight CNN
layer (instead of a position-shared CNN) in order to induce a hidden layer. The motivation
for this is that different matching ranges between a question term and answer will influence
the later ranking score differently. After this, they incorporate an attention network for
each question term to explicitly encode the importance of each question term and produce
the final ranking score. They rank the answer sentences based on the predicted score and
calculate MAP and MRR. Whereas Severyn and Moschitti (2015) and Wang and Nyberg
(2015) need to incorporate additional features in order to achieve comparative perfor
mance, Yang et al. (2016b) do not require any feature engineering.
Suggu et al. (2016) propose a Deep Feature Fusion Network (DFFN) to exploit both
hand-crafted features (HCF) and deep learning based systems for Answer Question Pre
diction. Specifically, query/answer sentence representations are embedded using a CNN. A
single feature vector of 601 dimensions serves as input to a second stage fully-connected
NN. Features include sentence representations, HCF (e.g., TagMe, Google Cross-Lingual
Dictionary (GCD), and Named Entities (NEs)), similarity measures between questions and
answers, and metadata such as an answer author’s reputation score. The output of the
second stage NN is a score predicting the answer quality. They compare their approach to
the top two best performing HCF based systems from SemEval 2015 and a pure deep
learning system. For SemEval 2016, DFFN was compared with their corresponding top
two best performing system. Results show that DFFN performs better than the top systems
across all metrics (MAP, F1 and accuracy) in both SemEval 2015 and 2016 datasets. The
authors attribute this to fusing the features learned from deep learning and HCF, since
some important features are hard to learn automatically. As an example, question and
answer often consists of several NEs along with variants, which are hard to capture using
deep learning. However, NEs can be extracted from QA and their similarity used as a
feature. Their use of HCF was also motivated by the many available similarity resources,
such as Wikipedia, GCD, and click-through data, which could be leveraged to capture
richer syntactic and semantic similarities between QA pairs.
7.2 Conversational agents
7.2.1 Learn
Learn to match An automatic conversation response system called Deep Learning-to
Respond (DL2R) is proposed by Yan et al. (2016). They train and test on 10 million
posting-reply pairs of human conversation web data from various sources, including
microblog websites, forums, Community Question Answering (CQA) bases, etc. For a
given query they reformulate it using other contextual information and retrieve the most
likely candidate reply. They model the total score as a function of three scores: query
reply, query-posting, and query-context, each fed into a neural network consisting of bi
123
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
151
directional LSTM RNN layers, convolution and pooling layers, and several feed-forward
layers. The strength of DL2R comes from the incorporation of reply, posting, and context
with the query.
8 Sponsored search
8.1 Learn to match
Azimi et al. (2015) use DSSM represetantations for ad keyword re-writing. In paid search,
each ad is associated with a set of keywords called bided keywords. The ads are ranked
against a query and the ads at high rank are displayed to the user. In order to overcome the
vocabulary mismatch between user queries and bided keywords, bided keywords are
replaced with more common keywords. A set of candidate keywords are extracted from the
set of documents returned by a search engine in response to the bided keyword query. The
DSSM model is leveraged to rank the candidate keywords against the original keywords.
The Deep-Intent model proposed by Zhai et al. (2016a, b) comprises a Bidirectional
Recurrent Neural Network (BRNN) combined with an attention module as the SCN. The
attention module, first introduced in Bahdanau et al. (2014) for neural machine translation,
is referred to as attention pooling layer. This is the first work that employs an attention
module for a web search task. A recurrent neural network takes a sequence of words and
generates a sequence of distributed representations, so-called context-vectors, aligned with
each word. Each context vector encodes the semantics of the context from the start to the
corresponding word. A Bidirectional Recurrent Neural Network (BRNN) processes the
input word sequence in both forward and backward directions.
Context vectors generated by a BRNN encode the context after and before the asso
ciated word. The pooling strategy is merging the context vectors vectors into a single
vector that encodes the semantics of the whole sequence. The sequence vector is assigned
the last context vector in last pooling, whereas an element-wise max operation is applied
on context vectors in max-pooling. Inattention pooling, the sequence vector is computed
by a weighted sum of context vectors where the weights are determined by the attention
module. The attention module takes a sequence of context vectors and outputs a weight for
each vector. The similarity score between a query and an ad is obtained by the dot product
of their distributed representations. Similar query-ad pairs for training are extracted from
the click logs. Query-ad pairs that have a click are selected as training samples and for each
such sample, a randomly selected set of query-ad pairs (without click) are used as negative
samples. Distributed representations are evaluated on click-logs from a product ad search
engine with 966K pairs manually labeled by human judges. In the experiments, models that
are built from different choices of RNN type (RNN, Bidirectional RNN, LSTM and
LSTM-RNN) and pooling strategy (max-pooling, last pooling and attention pooling) are
compared. The attention layer provides a significant gain in the AUC (area-under-curve of
the receiver operating characteristic) scores when used with RNN and BRNN whereas it
performs on a par with last pooling when used with LSTM-based networks. This can be
attributed to the power of LSTM units for capturing long-term contextual relations. Besides
the evaluation of distributed representations for matching, the attention scores are used to
extract a subset of query words. Words that have the highest attention scores are selected to
rewrite the query.
123
152
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
8.2 Learn to predict
Grbovic et al. (2015a) present a pair of Learn to predict models in Grbovic et al.
(2015a, b). In Grbovic et al. (2015a), Grbovic et al propose query2vec, a two-layer
architecture, where the upper layer models the temporal context of a query session using a
Skip-gram model, and the lower layer models word sequences within a query using
word2vec CBOW. They also introduce two incremental models: ad-query2vec,
which incorporates the learning of ad click vectors in the upper layer by inserting them into
query sequences after queries that occurred immediately prior to an ad click; and di
rected ad-query2vec, which uses past queries as context for a directed language
model in the upper layer. The models are trained using 12 billion sessions collected on
Yahoo search and evaluated offline using historical activity logs, where success is mea
sured by the click-through rate of ads served. All three query2vec models show
improvement over sponsored keyword lists and search retargeting using word2vec and
query flow graph.
In their subsequent, longer study, Grbovic et al. (2015b) propose a method to train
context and content-aware word embeddings. The first proposal is context2vec. It
treats a search session as a sentence and each query from the session as a word from the
sentence. It uses word2vec’s Skip-gram model. Queries with similar context will result
in similar embeddings. The second model is content2vec. This method is similar to Le
and Mikolov (2014)’s PV in that it uses the query as a paragraph to predict the word in its
context. The third model, context-content2vec, similar to their earlier query2
vec, combines context2vec and content2vec to build a two-layer model which
jointly considers the query session context and the query context. The context of the query
is defined both by its content and other queries in the same session. The models are trained
on Yahoo search logs that contain 12 billion sessions and embeddings for approximately 45
million queries are learned. Learned query embeddings are leveraged for rewriting queries
in order to improve search re-targeting. The original query is expanded with its k nearest
neighbor queries in the query embedding space. The learned model is evaluated on TREC
Web Track 2009–2013 queries and an in-house data set from Yahoo. For queries in the
TREC data set, the query rewrites obtained by the proposed models are editorially judged.
The PV-DM model that only predicts context yields lower editorial grades than the Query
Flow Graph (QFG) baseline. Rewrites by context2vec and context-content2vec embeddings
outperform the baseline. The rewrites by the context-content2vec ad model, which extends
context-content2vec by adding the ads and links clicked in the same session to the TTU
context, are assigned the highest editorial grades on average.
9 Similar item retrieval
9.1 Related document search
9.1.1 Aggregate
Explicit Kusner et al. (2014) propose the Word Mover’s Distance (WMD) for computing
distances between two documents. WMD is defined as the minimum cumulative distance
that all words in the first document of the pair need to travel to exactly match the other
document of the pair. The distance between two words is computed by the Euclidean
123
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
153
distance in the word2vec space. Authors evaluate the WMD metric on 8 supervised
document datasets: BBC sports articles, tweets labeled with sentiments, recipe procedure
descriptions, medical abstracts with different disease groups, academic papers with pub
lisher names, news datasets with different topics, Amazon reviews with different category
products. They compare their method with baselines including bag-of-words, TF-IDF,
BM25 Okapi, LSI, LDA and so on. Their model outperforms these baselines.
Kim et al. (2016) propose another version of WMD specific to query-document simi
larity. The high computational cost of WMD is tackled by mapping queries to documents
using a word embedding model trained on a document set. They make several changes to
the original WMD methods: changing the weight of term by introducing inverse document
frequency, and changing the original dissimilarity measure to cosine similarity. However,
they do not provide any comparison versus WMD as a baseline.
9.1.2 Learn
Learn to match Semantic hashing is proposed by Salakhutdinov and Hinton (2009) to map
semantically similar documents near to one another in hashing space, facilitating easy
search for similar documents. Multiple layers of Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBMs)
are used to learn the semantic structure of documents. The final layer is used as a hash code
that compactly represents the document. The lowest layer is simply word-count data and is
modeled by the Poisson distribution. The hidden layers are binary vectors of lower
dimensions. The deep generative model is learned by first pre-training the RBMs one layer
at a time (from bottom to top). The network is then ‘‘unrolled’’, i.e., the layers are turned
upside down and stacked on top of the current network. The final result is an auto-encoder
that learns a low-dimensional hash code from the word-count vector and uses that hash
code to reconstruct the original word-count vector. The auto-encoder is then fine-tuned by
back-propagation. Results show that semantic hashing is much faster than locality sensitive
hashing (Andoni and Indyk 2006; Datar et al. 2004) and can find semantically similar
documents in time independent of document collection size. However, semantic hashing
difficult optimization procedures and a slow training mechanism, reducing applicability to
large-scale tasks (Liu et al. 2012).
Learn to predict Djuric et al. (2015) point out use of the HDV model, reviewed in
Sect. 5.1.3, for exploring similar documents in a document collection.
Le and Mikolov (2014) assess vectors obtained by averaging PV-DM and PV-DBOW
vectors (see Sect. 3.3.6 for details of PV) on snippet retrieval tasks. The snippet retrieval
experiments are performed on a dataset of triplets created using snippets of the top 10
results retrieved by a search engine, for a set of 1 million queries. Each triplet is composed
of two relevant snippets for a query and a randomly selected irrelevant snippet from the
collection. Cosine similarity between paragraph vectors is shown to be an effective sim
ilarity metric for distinguishing similar snippets in such triplets. Dai et al. (2014) show that
paragraph vectors outperform the vector representations obtained by LDA (Blei et al.
2003), average of word embeddings and tf-idf weighted one-hot vector representations, on
a set of document triplets constructed with the same strategy in Le and Mikolov (2014),
using Wikipedia and arXiv documents.
123
154
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
9.2 Detecting text reuse
9.2.1 Aggregate
Explicit The goal of Zhang et al. (2014) is to efficiently retrieve passages that are
semantically similar to a query, making use of hashing methods on word vectors that are
learned in advance. Other than the given word vectors, no further deep learning is used.
Like Clinchant and Perronnin (2013) and Zhou et al. (2015), they adopt the Fisher Kernel
framework to convert variable-size concatenations of word embeddings to fixed length.
However, this resulting fixed-length Fisher vector is very high-dimensional and dense, so
they test various state-of-the-art hashing methods (e.g., Spectral Hashing Weiss et al. 2009;
Charikar 2002) for reducing the Fisher vector to a lower-dimensional binary vector.
Experiments are conducted on six collections including TIPSTER (Volumes 1–3),
ClueWeb09-Cat-B, Tweets2011, SogouT 2.0, Baidu Zhidao, and Sina Weibo, with some
sentences manually annotated for semantic similarity. Hashing methods that use Fisher
vector representations based on word embeddings achieve higher precision-recall curves
than hashing methods without vector representations and have comparable computational
efficiency.
9.3 Similar question retrieval
9.3.1 Aggregate
Explicit Learning of word embeddings coupled with category metadata for CQA is pro
posed by Zhou et al. (2015). They adopt word2vec’s Skip-gram model augmented with
category metadata from online questions, with category information encoding the attributes
of words in the question (see Zhang et al. 2016a for another example of integrating
categorical data with word embeddings). In this way, they group similar words based on
their categories. They incorporate the category constraint into the original Skip-gram
objective function. After the word embedding is learned, they use Fisher kernel (FK)
framework to convert the question into a fixed length vector (similar to Clinchant and
Perronnin 2013; Zhang et al. 2014). To retrieve similar questions, they use the dot product
of FVs to calculate the semantic similarities. For their experiments, Zhou et al. (2015) train
word embeddings on Yahoo! Answers and Baidu Zhidao for English and Chinese,
respectively. Results show that the category metadata powered model outperforms all the
other baselines not using metadata. Future work might include exploring how to utilize
other metadata information, such as user ratings, to train more powerful word embeddings.
9.3.2 Learn
Learn to match Lei et al. (2016) address the similar question retrieval in CQA platforms
with a framework that applies Learn to match and Learn to generate in two separate stages
of training. In the pre-training phase, an encoder-decoder network that generates the title of
a question given title, body or merged title-body of the question, is trained. The encoder
network is based on gated (non-consecutive) convolutions. Owing to the pre-training step,
unsupervised question collection is utilized to tailor task-specific word embeddings and
learn a rough semantic compositionality function for the questions. The encoder learned in
the first step is used as the SCN for a training Learn to match model on the user-annotated
123
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
155
similar question pairs. Evaluation is done on the StackExchange AskUbuntu data set.
Negative pairs are constructed by selecting random questions from the collection. For the
test set, similar pairs are annotated manually as the user-marked pairs are found to be
noisy. In order to evaluate effectiveness, a set of questions retrieved by BM25 are ranked
based on similarity scores computed by the learned Learn to match model. Lei et al present
a comprehensive set of experiments that analyse both the overall gain by pre-training and
the effect of the design choices such as the encoder neural network type, pooling strategies
and inclusion of question body. Highest effectiveness scores are achieved by the combi
nation of the gated convolutions, last-pooling and pre-training.
9.4 Recommendation
9.4.1 Aggregate
Explicit Manotumruksa et al. (2016) models user preferences using word embeddings for
the task of context-aware venue recommendations (CAVR). In CAVR, each user can
express a set of contextual aspects for their preference. Each aspect has multiple contextual
dimension term, with each term having a list of related term. The task then is to rank a list
of venues by measuring how well each of venue matches user’s context preferences. It
develops two approaches to model user-venue preferences and context-venue preferences
using word embedding. First, it infers a vector representation for each venue using the
comments on the venue, and it models the user-venue preferences using the rated venues’
vector representation in the user’s profile. Second, it models each dimension of each aspect
in the context-venue preferences by identifying several most similar terms of that
dimension term.
To evaluate their user-venue preferences model, Manotumruksa et al. (2016) firstly
train word embeddings using Skip-gram model on the venues’ comments dataset from
Foursquare. Then it calculates the cosine similarity between the vector representation of
venue and the user, and use it as a feature in the learning to rank system. It conducts the
experiment on TREC 2013 and 2014 Contextual Suggestion tracks, and reports P@5 and
MRR. The result shows the system with the proposed features using word embedding
outperforms those without using word embedding.
Then, to evaluate its context-aware preference model, Manotumruksa et al. (2016) use
cosine similarity between the venue and each of the contextual aspects as a feature in the
ranking system. It also incorporates venue-dependent features and user-venue preference
features. This experiment on TREC 2015 Contextual Suggestion task shows that the
proposed new system outperforms the baseline that does not utilize user information and
their contextual preferences, and it also outperforms the top performing system under P@5.
9.4.2 Learn
Learn to match Gao et al. (2014) propose using DSSM for both automatic highlighting of
relevant keywords in documents and recommendation of alternative relevant documents
based upon these keywords. They evaluate their framework based on what they call in
terestingness tasks, derived from Wikipedia anchor text and web traffic logs. They find that
feeding DSSM derived features into a supervised classifier for recommendation offers
state-of-the-art performance and is more effective than simply computing distance in the
DSSM latent space. Future work could incorporate complete user sessions, since prior
123
156
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
browsing and interaction history recorded in the session provide useful additional signals
for predicting interestingness. This signal might be modeled most easily by using an RNN.
10 Non textual (or behavioural)
Borisov et al. (2016b) propose a distributed representation which captures the user
information need as sequence of vector states instead of traditional binary event used in a
probabilistic graphical model (PGM) based click model (Chuklin et al. 2015). Existing
PGM based click models capture a user’s behavior as a sequence of observable and latent
events. However, one serious limitation of these click models is that the dependencies
among the sequence of the events are hand-crafted. The basic idea of Borisov et al’s
proposed model is as follows: they initialize their vector state with the initial user query
and then update the vector states based on the user interaction and the next document. For
transitioning from one state to another they define three mapping functions which they
learn from the training data using two different neural networks architectures: RNN and
LSTM. They perform their experimental analysis using Yandex (a major commercial
search engine in Russia) Relevance Prediction dataset6 on a user click prediction task and a
relevance prediction task. As a baseline they use the DBN, DCM, CCM and UBM click
models.7 As a performance metrics they have used perplexity and log-likelihood and for
relevance prediction task they have use NDCG at the 1, 3 , 5 and 10 level. Their exper
imental evidence shows that their proposed model has better predictive power than all
those baseline.
As a follow-up to Borisov et al. (2016a, b) focus on behavioral signals based on times
between user actions. The ability to accurately predict (1) click dwell time (i.e., time spent
by a user on the landing page of a search result), and (2) times from submission of a query
to the first/last click on the results and to the next query submission (if none of the results
will be clicked) allows us to optimize search engines for constructing result pages and
suggesting query reformulations that minimize time it takes users to satisfy their infor
mation needs. At the heart of the solution proposed by the authors an LSTM is used to
capture the contexts in which user actions take place. The proposed context-aware time
model is evaluated on four temporal prediction tasks and a ranking task. The results show
that the proposed context-aware time model, which makes use of the context in which
actions take place, provides a better means to explain times between user actions than
existing methods.
Predicting click-through rate (CTR) and conversion rate from categorical inputs such as
region, ad slot size, user agent, etc., is important in sponsored search. Zhang et al. (2016a)
propose the first neural approach we know of to predict CTR for advertising. The authors
develop two deep learning approaches to this problem, a Factorization Machine supported
Neural Network (FNN) and Sampling-based Neural Network (SNN). The Factorization
Machine is a non-linear model that can efficiently estimate feature interactions of any order
even in problems with high sparsity by approximating higher order interaction parameters
with a low-rank factorized parameterization. The use of an FM-based bottom layer in the
deep network, therefore, naturally solves the problem of high computational complexity of
training neural networks with high-dimensional binary inputs. The SNN is augmented
either by a sampling-based Restricted Boltzmann Machine (SNN-RBM) or a sampling
6 http://imat-relpred.yandex.ru/en/datasets.
7 Implementations of all of these click models are available at https://github.com/markovi/PyClick.
123
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
157
based Denoising Auto-Encoder (SNN-DAE). The main challenge is that given many
possible values of several categorical fields, converting them into dummy variables results
in a very high-dimensional and sparse input space. For example, thirteen categorical fields
can become over 900,000 binary inputs in this problem. The FNN and SNN reduce the
complexity of using a neural network on such a large input by limiting the connectivity in
the first layer and by pre-training by selective sampling, respectively. After pre-training,
the weights are fine-tuned in a supervised manner using back-propagation. Evaluation
focuses on the tuning of SNN-RBM and SNN-DAE models and their comparison against
logistic regression, FM and FNN, on the iPinYou dataset8 (Liao et al. 2014) with click data.
Results show that one of the proposed methods performs best, though the baselines are
often close behind and twice take second place. The authors also find a diamond-shape
architecture is better than increasing, decreasing, or constant hidden-layer sizes and that
dropout works better than L2 regularization. Though this method can extract non-linear
features, it is only very effective when dealing with advertisements without images.
Consequently, further research on multi-modal sponsored search to model images and text
would be useful to pursue.
11 Lessons and reflections
At the end of the early years of neural IR, it is natural to ask the following question: Is
there a set of established guidelines for neural IR? Is it sufficient to aggregate embeddings
or do we really need deep neural network models? In this section, we summarize the
lessons and reflections compiled from the reviewed work. Apart from the high-level choice
between the Aggregate and Learn methods, there are separate design choices to be made
for each category identified in Table 2.
As to a high level view regarding the choice between Aggregate and Learn, no con
sistent advantage of word embeddings has emerged. Among the models that fall within the
aggregate category, directly using word embeddings provides consistent gains in Ganguly
et al. (2015) but not in Diaz et al. (2016), Nalisnick et al. (2016), Zamani and Croft
(2016a, b), Zuccon et al. (2015). In Zuccon et al. (2015), word embedding similarity
achieves comparable effectiveness to mutual information (MI) based term similarity. For
query-document similarity, Nalisnick et al. (2016) point out that utilising relations between
the IN and OUT embedding spaces learned by CBOW yields a more effective similarity
function for query-document pairs. Diaz et al. (2016) propose to learn word embeddings
from a topically constrained corpora since the word embeddings learned from an uncon
strained corpus are found to be too general. Zamani and Croft (2016a, b) apply a sigmoid
function on the cosine similarity scores in order to increase the discriminative power.
Similar to past development of new modeling techniques in IR, there is a common
theme of researchers starting first with bag-of-words models then wanting to move toward
modeling longer phrases in their future work. Ganguly et al. (2015) suggest future work
should investigate compositionality of term embeddings. Zuccon et al. (2015) propose
incorporating distributed representations of phrases to better model query term depen
dencies and compositionality. Zheng and Callan (2015) propose direct modeling of
bigrams and proximity terms. Zamani and Croft (2016b) suggest query language models
based on mutual-information and more complex language models (bigram, trigram, etc.)
could be pursued.
8 http://data.computational-advertising.org.
123
158
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
11.1 Reflections on Aggregate
In this section, we present the reflections on the evaluation of neural IR systems that follow
the Aggregate approach and rely on word embeddings.
11.1.1 Is there an established guideline for the choices to be made for learning word
embeddings?
Use of word embeddings involves the design decisions presented below.
NLM
Corpora
Should one use word2vec (CBOW or Skip-gram) (Mikolov et al.
2013a, b), GloVe (Pennington et al. 2014), or something else (such as
count-based embeddings)? Can embeddings from multiple sets be
selected between dynamically or combined together (Neelakantan
et al. 2014; Zhang et al. 2016b)?
What training data/corpora should be used? Does performance vary
much if we simply use off-the-shelf embeddings (e.g., from
word2vec or GLoVe) versus re-training embeddings for a target
domain, either by fine-tuning (Mesnil et al. 2013) off-the-shelf
embeddings or re-training from scratch? Presumably, larger training
data is better, along with in-domain data similar to the test data on
which the given system is to be applied, but how does one trade-off
greater size of out-of-domain data versus smaller in-domain data?
How might they be best used in combination?
Hyperparameters How should hyper-parameters be set (e.g., dimensionality of
embedding space, window size, etc.)?
OOV Words
How should one deal with out-of-vocabulary (OOV) terms not found
in the word embedding training data?
There is no complete analysis that would help to derive guidelines. We summarize the
reported partial observations from the literature.
Choice of NLM Selection among word2vec CBOW or Skip-gram or GloVe appears
quite varied. Zuccon et al. (2015) compare CBOW versus Skip-gram, finding ‘‘no statis
tical significant differences between the two ...’’ Kenter and de Rijke (2015) use both
word2vec and GloVe (Pennington et al. 2014) embeddings (both the originally released
embeddings as well training their own embeddings) in order to induce features for their
machine learning model. They report model effectiveness using the original public
embeddings with or without their own additional embeddings, but do not report further
ablation studies to understand the relative contribution of different embeddings used.
Grbovic et al. (2015a)’s query2vec uses a two-level architecture in which the upper
layer models the temporal context of query sequences via Skip-gram, while the bottom
layer models word sequences within a query using CBOW. However, these choices are not
justified, and their later work Grbovic et al. (2015b) uses Skip-gram only. ALMasri et al.
(2016) evaluate both CBOW and Skip-gram word2vec embeddings (using default
dimensionality and context window settings) but present only Skip-gram results, writing
that ‘‘there was no big difference in retrieval performance between the two.’’ Zamani and
Croft (2016a, b) adopt GloVe without explanation. Similarly for word2vec, Mitra et al.
(2016) simply adopt CBOW, while others adopt Skip-gram (De Vine et al. 2014; Man
otumruksa et al. 2016; Vulic and Moens 2015; Yang et al. 2016b; Ye et al. 2016; Zhou
123
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
159
et al. 2015). Zhang and Wallace (2015) perform an empirical analysis in the context of
using CNNs for short text classification. They found that the ‘‘best’’ embedding to use for
initialization depended on the dataset. Motivated by this observation, the authors proposed
a method for jointly exploiting multiple sets of embeddings (e.g., one embedding set
induced using GloVe on some corpus and another using a word2vec variant on a dif
ferent corpus) (Zhang et al. 2016b). This may also be fruitful for IR tasks, suggesting a
potential direction for future work.
Corpora In the work that we have reviewed, embeddings are either learned from a
general-purpose corpus like Wikipedia (general purpose embeddings) or a task-specific
corpus. For Ad-hoc retrieval, the retrieval corpus itself is considered as a corpus to learn
embeddings. Besides, word embeddings are learned from various task-specific corpora of
community questions and their metadata (Zhou et al. 2015), journal abstracts and patient
records (De Vine et al. 2014) and venues’ comments from Foursquare (Manotumruksa
et al. 2016). Vulic and Moens (2015) learn bilingual word embeddings from a corpus of
pseudo-bilingual documents obtained via a merge-and-shuffle approach on a document
level parallel corpora, applying their model to cross-lingual IR.
For ad-hoc retrieval, embeddings learned from Wikipedia (general purpose embed
dings) and embeddings learned from the retrieval corpus itself (corpus-specific word
embeddings) are compared in Zheng and Callan (2015), Zuccon et al. (2015). The authors
note that no significant effect of this choice is observed for query-reweighting (Zheng and
Callan 2015) or in a translation language model for computing term similarities (Zuccon
et al. 2015). Zamani and Croft (2016b) train GloVe on three external corpora and report,
‘‘there is no significant differences between the values obtained by employing different
corpora for learning the embedding vectors.’’ Similarly, Zheng and Callan (2015),
regarding their query-reweighting model, write:
‘‘[the system] performed equally well with all three external corpora; the differences
among them were too small and inconsistent to support any conclusion about which
is best. However, although no external corpus was best for all datasets ... The corpus
specific word vectors were never best in these experiments ... given the wide range of
training data sizes– varying from 250 million words to 100 billion words– it is
striking how little correlation there is between search accuracy and the amount of
training data.’’
In contrast, Diaz et al. (2016) highlight that query expansion with word embeddings
learned from a topic-constrained collection of documents yields higher effectiveness scores
compared to embeddings learned from a general-purpose corpora. Besides, Yang et al.
(2016c) considers classification in which one background corpus (used to train word
embeddings) is a Spanish Wikipedia Dump which contains over 1 million articles, while
another is a collection of 20 million tweets having more than 10 words per tweet. As
expected, they find that when the background training text matches the classification text,
the performance is improved.
Hyperparameters Vulic and Moens (2015), Yang et al. (2016c), Zheng and Callan
(2015), Zuccon et al. (2015) compare different training hyper-parameters such as window
size and dimensionality of word embeddings. Zuccon et al. (2015)’s sensitivity analysis of
the various model hyperparameters for inducing word embeddings shows that manipula
tions of embedding dimensionality, context window size, and model objective (CBOW vs.
Skip-gram) have no consistent impact on model performance versus baselines. Vulic and
Moens (2015) find that while increasing dimensionality provides more semantic expres
siveness, the impact on retrieval performance is relatively small. Zheng and Callan (2015)
123
160
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
find that 100 dimensions work best for estimating term weights, better than 300 and 500. In
experiments using the Terrier platform, Yang et al. (2016c) find that for the Twitter
election classification task using CNNs, word embeddings with a large context window and
dimension size can achieve statistically significant improvements.
Out Of Vocabulary Terms Regarding the handling of OOV terms, the easiest solution is
to discard or ignore the OOV terms. For example, Zamani and Croft (2016b) only consider
queries where the embedding vectors of all terms are available. However, in end-to-end
systems, where we are jointly estimating (or refining) embeddings alongside other model
parameters, it is intuitive to randomly initialize embeddings for OOV words. For instance,
in the context of CNNs for text classification, Kim (2014) adopted this approach. The
intuition behind this is two-fold. First, if the same OOV appears in a pair of texts, queries,
or documents being compared, this contributes to the similarity scores between those two.
Second, if two different OOV terms appear in the same pair, their dissimilarity will not
contribute in the similarity function. However, this does not specifically address accidental
misspellings or creative spellings (e.g., ‘‘kool’’) commonly found in social media. One
might address this by hashing words to character n-grams (see Sect. 11.2.6) or character
based modeling more generally (e.g., Conneau et al. 2016; Dhingra et al. 2016; Zhang
et al. 2015).
11.1.2 How to use word embeddings?
As mentioned previously, publications in the Implicit category are characterized by inte
grating word embedding similarity into existing retrieval frameworks. In contrast, publi
cations in the Explicit category build TTU representations based on word embeddings, in
an unsupervised way. For the Implicit approach, the term similarity function is a design
choice whereas the TTU similarity function stands as a design choice for the Explicit
category.
Besides the similarity functions, for the Explicit category, it is crucial to note the choice
of the aggregation function that builds the TTU vector from word embeddings. There are
some publications that diverge from the simple aggregation method averaging/summing
embedding vectors. Clinchant and Perronnin (2013), Zhang et al. (2014), Zhou et al.
(2015) use a Fisher Kernel (Jaakkola et al. 1999) in order to compute TTU representations.
Ganguly et al. (2016) opine that simply adding vectors of word embedding cannot suffi
ciently capture the context of longer textual units. Instead, the authors propose a new form
of similarity metric based on the assumption that the document can be represented as a
mixture of p-dimensional Gaussian probability density functions and each word2vec
embedding (p-dimensions) is an observed sample. Then, using the EM algorithm, they
estimate the probability density function that can be incorporated into the query likelihood
language model using linear interpolation.
Word similarity function Cosine similarity is the choice adopted by almost all of the
publications reviewed. However, Zamani and Croft (2016a, b) propose using sigmoid and
softmax transformations of cosine similarity on the grounds that cosine similarity values
are not discriminative enough. Their empirical analysis shows that there are no substantial
differences (e.g., two times more) between the similarity of the most similar term and the
1000th similar term to a given term w, while the 1000th word is unlikely to have any
semantic similarity with w. Consequently, they propose using monotone mapping functions
(e.g., sigmoid or softmax) to transform the cosine similarity scores.
TTU similarity function Publications under the Explicit category are characterized by
building TTU representations based on pre-trained embeddings and computing TTU pair
123
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
161
similarity by cosine similarity of the distributed TTU representations. Deviating from this
generic approach, Ganguly et al. (2016) opine that simply adding vectors of word
embedding cannot sufficiently capture the context of longer textual units. Instead, the
authors propose a new form of similarity metric based on the assumption that the document
can be represented as a mixture of p-dimensional Gaussian probability density functions
and each word2vec embedding (p-dimensions) is an observed sample. Then, using the
EMalgorithm, they estimate the probability density function which can be incorporated to
the query likelihood language model using linear interpolation. Finally, Word Mover’s
Distance (WMD) (Kusner et al. 2014) is an alternative distance metric defined as the
minimum cumulative distance that all words in the first document of the pair need to travel
to exactly match the other document of the pair. The distance between two words is
computed by the Euclidean distance in the word2vec space.
11.2 Reflections on Learn
In this subsection, we present design choices for the models reviewed in the Learn category
of the How dimension of our taxonomy (Table 2).
11.2.1 How to choose the appropriate category of Learn?
When making a choice for a training objective (a subcategory of Learn), the following
three points should be considered: training data, representations for unseen TTUs, and TTU
length.
Training data Learn to match models are trained to maximize the relevance scores of
pairs that have been annotated or inferred to be relevant and minimize the scores of
irrelevant pairs. In contrast, Learn to predict and Learn to generate models assume that
TTUs that co-occur in the same context are similar.
Computing representations for unseen TTUs In the Learn to autoencode, Learn to
generate and Learn to match models, distributed representations of unseen TTUs can be
computed by forward propagation through the SCN. In contrast, Learn to predict models
are focused on learning embeddings for a fixed collection of TTUs. An additional inference
step, which requires including the representations of the entire collection, is required for
obtaining the embedding of an unobserved TTU. While PV (the first Learn to predict
model) has been adopted in many studies (e.g., Xia et al. 2016 use PV-DBOW to represent
documents) and is often reported as a baseline (e.g., Tai et al. 2015), concerns about
reproducibility have also been raised. Kiros et al. (2015) report results below SVM when
re-implementing PV. Kenter and de Rijke (2015) note, ‘‘it is not clear, algorithmically,
how the second step– the inference for new, unseen texts– should be carried out.’’ Perhaps
most significantly, later work co-authored by Mesnil et al. (2014)9 has disavowed the
original findings of Le and Mikolov (2014), writing, ‘‘to match the results from Le and
Mikolov (2014), we followed the [author’s] suggestion ... However, this produces the
[reported] result only when the training and test data are not shuffled. Thus, we consider
this result to be invalid.’’
TTU length Learn to generate models are designed to generate unseen synthetic textual
units. To this end, generating textual units has been shown to be successful for queries
(Luukkonen et al. 2016; Sordoni et al. 2015). Generating long textual units is not well
studied up to this point, except (Lioma et al. 2016). The DSSM variants from the Learn to
9 https://github.com/mesnilgr/iclr15.
123
162
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
match are shown to work better on document titles instead of the entire document content
(Guo et al. 2016a; Shen et al. 2014a).
11.2.2 Choice of semantic compositionality network: how to represent text beyond
single words? Does text granularity influence the choice?
The simplest way to represent longer textual units, such as phrases, sentences, or entire
documents, is to sum or average their constituent word embeddings. However such bag-of
words compositions ignore word ordering, and simple averaging treats all words as equally
important in composition (though some work has considered weighted operations, e.g.,
Vulic and Moens 2015). Ganguly et al. (2016) opine that:
‘‘... adding the constituent word vectors ... to obtain the vector representation of the
whole document is not likely to be useful, because ... compositionality of the word
vectors [only] works well when applied over a relatively small number of words ...
[and] does not scale well for a larger unit of text, such as passages or full documents,
because of the broad context present within a whole document.’’
Fortunately, a variety of SCNs, including Feed forward NN, CNN, RNN, LSTM and their
variants, have been proposed for inducing representations of longer textual units. However,
there is no evidence that any one method consistently outperforms the others, with the
performance of each method instead appearing to often depend on the specific task and
dataset being studied. We further discuss the use of CNNs and RNNs below.
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) Shen et al. (2014a, b) propose a Convolutional
Latent Semantic Model (CLSM) to encode queries and documents into fix-length vectors,
following a popular ‘‘convolution ? pooling’’ CNN architecture. The first layer of CLSM
is a word hashing layer that can encode words into vectors. CLSM does not utilize word
embeddings as input, seemingly distinguishing it from all other works using CNNs. Mitra
(2015) use CLSMs to encode query reformulations for query prediction, while Mitra and
Craswell (2015) use CLSMs on query prefix-suffix pairs corpus for query auto-completion.
They sample queries from the search query logs and split the query at every possible word
boundary to form prefix-suffix pairs.
Severyn and Moschitti (2015) and Suggu et al. (2016) adopt a similar ‘‘convolution ?
pooling’’ CNN architecture to encode question and answer sentence representations, which
serve as features for a second-stage ranking NN. See Mitra et al. (2016) for further dis
cussion of such two-stage telescoping approaches.
Yang et al. (2016b) develop a novel value-shared CNN, and apply it on the query
answer matching matrix to extract the semantic matching between the query and answer.
This model can capture the interaction between intermediate terms in the query and
answer, rather than only considering the final representation of the query and answer. The
motivation behind the value-shared CNN is that semantic matching value regularities
between a question and answer is more important than spatial regularities typical in
computer vision. Similarly, contemporaneous work by Guo et al. (2016a) notes:
‘‘Existing interaction-focused models, e.g., ARC-II and MatchPyramid, employ a
CNN to learn hierarchical matching patterns over the matching matrix. These models
are basically position-aware using convolutional units with a local ‘‘receptive field’’
and learning positional regularities in matching patterns. This may be suitable for the
image recognition task, and work well on semantic matching problems due to the
global matching requirement (i.e., all the positions are important). However, it may
123
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
163
not be suitable for the ad-hoc retrieval task, since such positional regularity may not
exist ...’’
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) Sordoni et al. (2015) build a hierarchical GRU to
encode the query and the query session into vector representations. Song et al. (2016) use
an LSTM to model user interests at different time steps and encode them into a vector.
Lioma et al. (2016) create new relevant information using an LSTM that takes the
concatenated text of a query and its known relevant documents as input using word
embeddings. However, rather than take the whole text of a document, they extract a
context window of n terms around every query term occurrence. Yan et al. (2016) use a
bidirectional LSTM followed by a CNN to model the original query, reformulated query,
candidate reply, and antecedent post in their human-computer conversation system. Wang
and Nyberg (2015) use a stacked bidirectional LSTM to sequentially read words from both
question and answer sentences, calculating relevance scores for answer sentence selection
through mean pooling across all time steps. Section 11.2.3 presents Cohen et al. (2016)’s
comparison of CNNs versus RNNs by document length.
11.2.3 Text granularity in IR: does text granularity have an effect on the optimal
choice for SCN?
Many studies to date focus on short text matching rather than longer documents more
typical of modern IR ad-hoc search. Cohen et al. (2016) study how the effectiveness of NN
models for IR vary as a function of document length (i.e., text granularity). They consider
three levels of granularity: (1) fine, where documents often contain only a single sentence
and relevant passages span only a few words (e.g., question answering); (2) medium, where
documents consist of passages with a mean length of 75 characters and relevant infor
mation may span multiple sentences (e.g., passage retrieval); and (3) coarse, or typical
modern ad-hoc retrieval. For fine granularity, they evaluate models using the TREC QA
dataset and find that CNNs outperform RNNs and LSTMs, as their filter lengths are able to
effectively capture language dependencies. For medium granularity, they evaluate using
the Yahoo Webscope L4 CQA dataset and conclude that LSTM networks outperform
CNNs due to their ability to model syntactic and semantic dependencies independent of
position in sequence. In contrast, RNNs without LSTM cells do not perform as well, as
they tend to ‘‘forget’’ information due to passage length.
For ad-hoc retrieval performance on Robust04, comparing RNNs, CNNs, LSTM,
DSSM, CLSM, Vulic and Moens (2015)’s approach, and Le and Mikolov (2014)’s PV,
Cohen et al. (2016) find that all neural models perform poorly. They note that neural
methods often convert documents into fixed-length vectors, which can introduce a bias for
either short or long documents. However, they find that the approaches of Vulic and Moens
(2015) and Le and Mikolov (2014) perform well when combined with language modeling
approaches that explicitly capture matching information of queries and documents. Similar
observation is also reported in Ganguly et al. (2016).
11.2.4 Choice of similarity function: which function should I choose to measure
the similarity between two text snippets?
Similarity here is not strictly limited to linguistic semantics, but more generally includes
relevance matching between queries and documents or questions and answers. While
123
164
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
cosine similarity is the simplest and the most common approach, a variety of more
sophisticated methods have been proposed.
Wang and Nyberg (2015) use a stacked bidirectional LSTM to sequentially read words
from both question and answer sentences, calculating relevance scores for answer sentence
selection through mean pooling across all time steps. Yan et al. (2016) match sentences by
concatenating their vector representations and feeding them into a multi-layer fully-con
nected neural network, matching a query with the posting and reply in a human computer
conversation system. Xia et al. (2016) propose a neural tensor network (NTN) approach to
model document novelty. This model takes a document and a set of other documents as
input. The architecture uses a tensor layer, a max-pooling layer, and a linear layer to output
a document novelty score. Guo et al. (2016a)’s recent Deep Relevance Matching Model
appears to be one of the most successful to date for ad-hoc search over longer document
lengths. In terms of textual similarity, they argue that the ad-hoc retrieval task is mainly
about relevance matching, different from semantic matching in NLP. They model the
interaction between query terms and document terms, building a matching histogram on
top of the similarities. They then feed the histogram into a feed forward neural network.
They also use a term gating network to model the importance of each query term.
Yang et al. (2016b) propose an attention-based neural matching model (aNMM) for
question answering. Similar to Guo et al. (2016a), they first model the interaction between
query terms and document terms to build a matching matrix. They then apply a novel
value-shared CNN on the matrix. Since not all query terms are equally important, they use
a softmax gate function as an attention mechanism in order to learn the importance of each
query term when calculating the matching between the query and the answer.
To summarize, simply calculating cosine similarity between two text vector represen
tations might not be the best choice to capture the relevance relation between texts. People
develop neural models to learn similarity, and model the interaction between texts in a finer
granularity.
11.2.5 Initializing word embeddings in NNs: should they be tuned
or not during the training process?
We observed three approaches for initializing and updating the embeddings during training
of Learn models:
• The embedding layer of the models are initialized randomly and learned from scratch
during training of the task-specific model.
• The embeddings layer is initialized with pre-trained embeddings and is kept fixed
during training of the task-specific model.
• The embedding layer is initialized with pre-trained embeddings and is fine-tuned for
the task during training of the task-specific model.
At present, there is no clear evidence showing that either method consistently works best.
However, we may note that learning word embeddings is possible only with large corpora;
thus in cases where task-specific training data is limited as in TREC Ad-Hoc collections
(Guo et al. 2016a) and the TREC-QA data set (see Sect. 7.1 for the related work), pre
trained word embeddings have been preferred to initialize, in order to shift focus of
training towards learning semantic compositionality.
123
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
165
11.2.6 How to cope with large vocabularies?
Training neural networks is computationally expensive and today it is not possible to train
a CNN or RNN with a 1M word vocabulary. word2vec models, being shallow networks
with a single linear layer can be trained with large vocabularies owing to softmax
approximation methods such as negative sampling and NCE. In cases where it is crucial to
learn a semantic compositionality model with a CNN or RNN architecture, the large
vocabulary brings a challenge. Word hashing, first introduced in Huang et al. (2013)
together with the DSSM model and adopted by Mitra (2015), Mitra and Craswell (2015),
Shen et al. (2014a, b), Ye et al. (2015), reduces large vocabularies to a moderate sized
vocabulary of 30K of character trigrams. Words are broken down into letter n-grams and
then represented as a vector of letter n-grams.
Huang et al. (2013) provide an empirical analysis where the original vocabulary size of
500K is reduced to only 30K owing to word hashing. While the number of English words
can be unlimited, the number of letter n-grams in English is often limited, thus word
hashing can resolve the out-of-vocabulary (OOV) problem as well. However, one inherent
problem of word hashing is the hashing conflict, which can be serious for a very large
corpus. Another set of methods, such as Byte Pair Encoding (Sennrich et al. 2016) have
been proposed in order to cope with large vocabularies in Neural Machine Translation.
Although only word hashing has been used for neural IR to this end, other vocabulary
reduction methods should be considered in future work.
12 Conclusion
The purpose of this survey is to offer an introduction to neural models for information
retrieval by surveying the state of knowledge up to the end of 2016. To this end we have
reviewed and classified existing work in the area. We used a taxonomy in which we
recognize different target textual unit (TTU), different types of usage of learned text
representations (‘‘usage’’) IR Tasks, as well as different methods for building represen
tations (‘‘how’’). Within the latter category we identified two sub-categories: the aggregate
and learn categories. The aggregate category includes methods based on pre-computed
word embeddings for computing semantic similarity, while the learn category covers
neural semantic compositionality models.
Within the aggregate category we observed two major patterns of exploiting word
embeddings. In the explicit type of use of embeddings, TTUs are associated with a represen
tation in the word embedding space and semantic similarity of TTUs is computed based on
these representations.Intheimplicittypeofuse,similarityofwordembeddingsispluggedinas
term similarity in an existing statistical language modeling frameworks for retrieval. Several
strategies for adapting word embeddings for document retrieval have been introduced, such as
topically constraining the document collection, new similarity functions and the inclusion of
TF-IDF weights for aggregating word embeddings. This may be understood as an indication
that we need to design IR specific objectives for learning distributed representations. Are the
training objective and semantic relationships encoded by the embedding vectors useful for the
targetretrievaltask?Afuturedirectionwouldbetoidentifythetypesofsemanticwordrelations
that matter to semantic matching in web search, across multiple tasks.
We classified the neural semantic compositionality models reviewed in the learn cat
egory, into four sub-categories Learn to autoencode, Learn to match, Learn to predict and
123
166
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
Learn to generate, considering the training objectives optimized for learning representa
tions. Learn to match models are trained using noisy relevance signals from click infor
mation in click-through logs whereas the models in the other categories are designed to
predict or generate task-specific context of TTUs. The majority of the Learn to match and
Learn to predict models are evaluated on datasets extracted from commercial search engine
logs. A comparative evaluation of models from different sub-categories on publicly
available data sets, is required in order to gain a deeper understanding of semantic com
positionality for matching.
Currently, existing Learn to predict/generate context and Learn to generate models
mostly rely on temporal context windows. It would be interesting to examine other types of
contextual relations in search logs, such as long term search history of users and noisy
relevance signals exploited by learn to match models. Another future direction would
concern applications of the attention mechanism (Bahdanau et al. 2014) for designing
models that can predict where a user would attend in document, given a query.
Looking forward, we believe there are several key directions where progress is needed.
First, we presented the document retrieval, query suggestion and ad retrievalsponsored
search tasks as largely disjoint tasks. However, the models proposed for one task may be
useful for another. For instance, the context-content2vec model (Grbovic et al. 2015b) was
evaluated only on matching ads to queries yet the distributed query representations could
also be evaluated for query suggestion or query auto completion (Cai and de Rijke 2016b).
In particular, there is a need to compare distributed query representations and similar
ity/likelihood scores produced by the proposed models on query tasks. In some work, the
representations were used as features in learning to rank frameworks and there are no clues
about the power of these representations in capturing semantics.
More broadly, there is a need for systematic and broad task-based experimental surveys
that focus on comparative evaluations of models from different categories, but for the same
tasks and under the same experimental conditions, very much like the reliable information
access (RIA) workshop that was run in the early 2000s to gain a deeper understanding of
query expansion and pseudo relevance feedback (Harman and Buckley 2009).
Another observation is that recently introduced generative models—mostly based on
recurrent neural networks—can generate unseen (synthetic) textual units. The generated
textual units have been evaluated through user studies (Lioma et al. 2016; Sordoni et al.
2015). For the query suggestion task, generated queries have been found to be useful; and
so have word clouds of a synthetic document. The impact of these recent neural models on
user satisfaction or retrieval scenarios should be investigated on real scenarios.
Over the years, IR has made tremendous progress by learning from user behavior, either
by introducing, e.g., click-based rankers (Radlinski and Joachims 2005) or, more
abstractly, by using models that capture behavioral notions such as examination probability
and attractiveness of search results through click models (Chuklin et al. 2015). How can
such implicit signals be used to train neural models for semantic matching in web search?
So far, we have only seen limited examples of the use of click models in training neural
models for web search tasks.
Interest in Neural IR has never been greater, spanning both active research and
deployment in practice10 (Metz 2016). Neural IR continues to accelerate in quantity of
work, sophistication of methods, and practical effectiveness (Guo et al. 2016a). New
methods are being explored that may be computationally infeasible today (see Diaz et al.
2016), but if proven effective, could motivate future optimization work to make them more
10 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RankBrain.
123
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
167
practically viable (e.g., Jurgovsky et al. 2016; Ordentlich et al. 2016). NN approaches have
come to dominate speech recognition (2011), computer vision (2013), and NLP (2015).
Similarly, deep learning will come to dominate information retrieval as well (Manning
2016).
At the sametime, healthy skepticism about Neural IR also remains. The key question in IR
todaymightbemostsuccinctlyexpressedas:‘‘Willitwork?’’WhileNNmethodshaveworked
quite well on short texts, effectiveness on longer texts typical of ad-hoc search has been
problematic (Cohen et al. 2016; Huang et al. 2013), with only very recent evidence to the
contrary (Guo et al. 2016a). Side by side comparisons of lexical versus neural methods often
show at least as many losses as gains for neural methods, with at best an advantage ‘‘on
average’’ (Van Gysel et al. 2016a, b). In addition, while great strides have been made in
computer vision through employing a very large number of hidden layers (hence ‘‘deep’’
learning), such deep structures have typically been less effective in NLP and IR than more
shallow architectures (Pang et al. 2016a), though again with notable recent exceptions
(Conneau et al. 2016). When Neural IR has led to improvements in ad-hoc search results,
improvements appear relatively modest (Diaz et al. 2016; Zamani and Croft 2016a)when
compared to traditional query expansion techniquesfor addressing vocabulary mismatch, such
as pseudo-relevance feedback (PRF). Both Ganguly et al. (2016) and Diaz et al. (2016)have
noted that global word embeddings, trained without reference to user queries, versus local
methods like PRF for exploiting query-context, appear limited similarly to the traditional
global-local divide seen with existing approaches like topic modeling (Yi and Allan 2009).
As Li (2016) put it, ‘‘Does IR Need Deep Learning?’’ Such a seemingly simple question
requires careful unpacking. Much of the above discussion assumes Neural IR should
deliver new state-of-the-art quality of search results for traditional search tasks. While it
may do so, this framing may be far too narrow, as Li (2016)’s presentation suggests. The
great strength of Neural IR may lie in enabling a new generation of search scenarios and
modalities, such as searching via conversational agents (Yan et al. 2016), multi-modal
retrieval (Ma et al. 2015a, b), knowledge-based search IR (Nguyen et al. 2016), or syn
thesis of relevant material (Lioma et al. 2016). It may also be that Neural IR will provide
greater traction for other future search scenarios not yet considered.
Given that the efficacy of deep learning approaches is often driven by ‘‘big data’’, will
Neural IR represent yet another fork in the road between industry and academic research,
where massive commercial query logs deliver Neural IR’s true potential? Or should we
frame this more positively as an opportunity for research on generating training material or
even simulation, as has previously been pursued for, e.g., learning to rank (Liu 2009), see,
e.g., Azzopardi et al. (2007), Berendsen et al. (2013b)? There is also an important contrast
to note here between supervised scenarios, such as learning to rank versus unsupervised
learning of word embeddings or typical queries (see Mitra 2015; Mitra and Craswell 2015;
Sordoni et al. 2015; Van Gysel et al. 2016a, b). LeCun et al. (2015) wrote, ‘‘we expect
unsupervised learning to become far more important in the longer term.’’ Just as the rise of
the Web drove work on unsupervised and semi-supervised approaches by the sheer volume
of unlabeled data it made available, the greatest value of Neural IR may naturally arise
where the biggest data is found: continually generated and ever-growing behavioral traces
in search logs, as well as ever-growing online content.
While skepticism of Neural IR may well remain for some time, the practical importance
of search today, coupled with the potential for significantly new traction offered by this
‘‘third wave’’ of NNs, makes it unlikely that researchers will abandon Neural IR anytime
soon without having first exhaustively tested its limits. As such, we expect the pace and
interest in Neural IR will only continue to blossom, both in new research and increasing
123
168
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
application in practice. Consequently, this first special-issue journal on Neural IR in 2017
will likely attract tremendous interest and is well-poised for timely impact on research and
practice.
Acknowledgements We would like to thank Christophe van Gysel from the University of Amsterdam, for
his valuable feedback and comments. We would also like to thank our anonymous reviewers for their
constructive comments and the guest editors for their advice. The following additional students at the
University of Texas at Austin contributed indirectly to the writing of this literature review: Manu Agarwal,
Edward Babbe, Anuparna Banerjee, Jason Cai, Dillon Caryl, Yung-Sheng Chang, Shobhit Chaurasia, Linli
Ding, Brian Eggert, Michael Feilbach, Alan Gee, Jeremy Gin, Rahul Huilgol, Miles Hutson, Neha Javalagi,
Yan Jiang, Kunal Lad, Yang Liu, Amanda Lucio, Kristen Moor, Daniel Nelson, Geoffrey Potter, Harshal
Priyadarshi, Vedhapriya Raman, Eric Roquemore, Juliette Seive, Abhishek Sinha, Ashwini Venkatesh,
Yuxuan Wang, and Xu Zhang.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 Inter
national License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution,
and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
Funding I.S. Altingovde is supported by Turkish Academy of Sciences Distinguished Young Scientist
Award (TU ¨BA-GEBI ˙P 2016). P. Karagoz is partially funded by TUBITAK Grant No. 112E275. M. de Rijke
was supported by Ahold Delhaize, Amsterdam Data Science, the Bloomberg Research Grant program, the
Dutch national program COMMIT, Elsevier, the European Community’s Seventh Framework Programme
(FP7/2007–2013) under Grant Agreement No. 312827 (VOX-Pol), the Microsoft Research Ph.D. program,
the Netherlands Institute for Sound and Vision, the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO)
under Project Nos. 612.001.116, HOR-11-10, CI-14-25, 652.002.001, 612.001.551, 652.001.003, and
Yandex. All content represents the opinion of the authors, which is not necessarily shared or endorsed by
their respective employers and/or sponsors.
Appendix 1: Acronyms used
AI
ASR
BoEW
BWESG
C-DSSM
CBOW
CDNN
CLSM
CNN
CQA
DESM
DFR
DRMM
DSM
DSSM
EPV
FK
FV
GLM
GloVe
GRU
artificial intelligence
automatic speech recognition
Bag of Embedded Words
Bilingual word Embeddings Skip-Gram
Convolutional Deep Structured Semantic Models
Continuous Bag of Words
Convolutional Deep Neural Network
Convolutional Latent Semantic Model
convolutional neural network
community question answering
Dual Embedding Space Model
Divergence From Randomness
Deep Relevance Matching Model
distributional semantic model
Deep Structured Semantic Model
Extended Paragraph Vector
Fisher Kernel
Fisher Vector
Generalized Language Model
Global Vectors
Gated Recurrent Unit
123
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
169
HAL
HDV
HRED
IR
IS
KB
LDA
LM
LSA
LSI
Hyperspace Analog to Language
Hierarchical Document Vector
Hierarchical Recurrent Encoder Decoder
information retrieval
Importance Sampling
knowledge base
Latent Dirichlet Allocation
language model
Latent Semantic Analysis
Latent Semantic Indexing
LSTM-DSSM LSTM Deep Structured Semantic Model
LSTM
MI
MT
NCE
NEG
NLM
NLP
NLTM
NN
NNLM
NTN
OOV
PAMM
PGM
PLSA
QA
PV-DBOW
PV-DM
PV
QLM
R-LTR
RBM
RecNN
RNN
RNNLM
SC
SCN
SGNS
TTU
WMD
Long Short Term Memory
mutual information
machine translation
Noise Contrastive Estimation
Negative Sampling
Neural Language Model
Natural language processing
Neural Translation Language Model
neural network
Neural Network Language Model
Neural Tensor Networks
Out Of Vocabulary
Perceptron Algorithm using Measures as Margins
probabilistic graphical model
Probabilistic Latent Semantic Analysis
question answering
Paragraph Vector with Distributed Bag of Words
Paragraph Vector with Distributed Memory
Paragraph Vector
query language model
Relational Learning-to-Rank framework
Restricted Boltzman Machine
recursive neural network
recurrent neural network
Recurrent Neural Network Language Model
semantic compositionality
Semantic Compositionality Network
Skip-Gram with Negative Sampling
target textual unit
Word Mover’s Distance
Appendix 2: Resources
In this section, we present pointers to publicly available resources and tools which the
reader would benefit for getting started with neural models, distributed representations, and
information retrieval experiments with semantic matching.
123
170
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
Word embeddings
Corpora used Wikipedia and GigaWord5 are the corpora widely used for learning word
embeddings. The latest Wikipedia dump can be obtained from Wikimedia.11 The Giga
Word5 data set is accessible through the LDC.12 Several authors have learned embeddings
from query logs (Cai and de Rijke 2016a; Kanhabua et al. 2016; Sordoni et al. 2015).
Pre-trained word embeddings It is possible to obtain pre-trained GloVe embeddings13
learned from large corpora, CBOW embeddings trained on large-scale Bing query logs
(Mitra et al. 2016)14 and different sets of word embeddings15 used for evaluating NLTM in
Zuccon et al. (2015).
Learning word embeddings The source code for GloVe (Pennington et al. 2014)16 and
the models introduced in Levy et al. (2015)17 is publicly shared by the authors. Imple
mentations of the Word2Vec and Paragraph Vector models are included in the gensim
library.18
Visualizing word embeddings The dimensionality reduction technique t-Distributed
Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE) (van der Maaten and Hinton 2008) is commonly
used for visualizing word embedding spaces and for trying to understand the structures
learned by neural models.19
Test corpora used for retrieval experiments
For retrieval experiments regarding neural models for semantic matching, the full range of
CLEF, FIRE and TREC test collections has been used. In Table 3, we present the list of
data sets used in experimental frameworks of reviewed work. For each data set, the list of
studies that report related experiment results is given in the table.
Implementing neural SC models
Theano,20 TensorFlow21 Torch22 and PyTorch23 are libraries that are widely used by the
deep learning community for implementing neural network models. These libraries enable
construction of neural network models from pre-defined high-level building blocks such as
hidden units and layers. It is possible to define neural network models with different
choices of architectures, non-linearity functions, etc.
11 https://dumps.wikimedia.org/enwiki/latest/enwiki-latest-pages-articles.xml.bz2.
12 https://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/LDC2011T07.
13 http://nlp.stanford.edu/projects/glove/.
14 https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=52597.
15 http://www.zuccon.net/ntlm.html.
16 http://nlp.stanford.edu/projects/glove/.
17 https://bitbucket.org/omerlevy/hyperwords.
18 https://radimrehurek.com/gensim/.
19 https://lvdmaaten.github.io/tsne/.
20 http://deeplearning.net/software/theano/.
21 https://www.tensorflow.org/.
22 http://torch.ch/.
23 http://pytorch.org/.
123
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
171
Table 3 Datasets used in experimental setups
English data
Study
20-Newsgroup Corpus
Amazon product data
(McAuley et al. 2015)
AOL Query Logs
Bing Query Logs and
WebCrawl
CLEF03 English Ad-hoc
CLEF 2016 Social Book
Search
CLEF Medical Corpora
eHealth
MSN Query Log
MSR Paraphrase Corpus
OHSUMED
PubMed
Reuters Volume I (RCV1-v2)
SemEval 2015–2016
Stack Overflow
TIPSTER (Volume 1–3)
Salakhutdinov and Hinton (2009)
Van Gysel et al. (2016a)
Kanhabua et al. (2016), Mitra (2015), Mitra and Craswell (2015), Sordoni
et al. (2015)
Mitra (2015), Mitra and Craswell (2015), Mitra et al. (2016), Nalisnick
et al. (2016)
Clinchant and Perronnin (2013)
Amer et al. (2016)
ALMasri et al. (2016)
Rekabsaz et al. (2016b)
Kanhabua et al. (2016)
Kenter and de Rijke (2015)
De Vine et al. (2014)
Balikas and Amini (2016)
Salakhutdinov and Hinton (2009)
DFFN (Suggu et al. 2016)
Boytsov et al. (2016)
Zhang et al. (2014)
TREC 1–2 Ad-hoc (AP 88–89) Clinchant and Perronnin (2013), Zamani and Croft (2016a, b), Zuccon
et al. (2015)
TREC 1–3 Ad-hoc
TREC 6–8 Ad-hoc
TREC 9–10
TREC 12 Ad-hoc
TREC 2005 HARD
TREC 2007–2008 Million
Query
TREC 2009–2011 Web
TREC 2009–2013 Web
TREC 2010–2012 Web
TREC 2011 Microblog
TREC 2012 Microblog
TREC 2015 Contextual
Suggestion
TREC ClueWeb09-Cat-B
TREC DOTGOV
TREC Enterprise Track
2005–2008
TREC GOV2
TREC MedTrack
Zuccon et al. (2015), Rekabsaz et al. (2016b)
GLM (Ganguly et al. 2015), Lioma et al. (2016), Rekabsaz et al. (2016a),
Roy et al. (2016b), Rekabsaz et al. (2016b), Roy et al. (2016a)
Roy et al. (2016a)
Diaz et al. (2016)
Rekabsaz et al. (2016a, b)
Yang et al. (2016a)
Xia et al. (2016)
PV (Grbovic et al. 2015b)
QEM (Sordoni et al. 2014)
CDNN (Severyn and Moschitti 2015), Zhang et al. (2014)
CDNN (Severyn and Moschitti 2015)
Manotumruksa et al. (2016)
DRMM (Guo et al. 2016a), QEM (Sordoni et al. 2014), Zhang et al.
(2014), Zheng and Callan (2015)
Zuccon et al. (2015)
Van Gysel et al. (2016b)
Yang et al. (2016a), Zamani and Croft (2016a, b), Zheng and Callan
(2015)
De Vine et al. (2014), Zuccon et al. (2015)
123
172
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
Table 3 continued
English data
Study
TREC QA 8–13
TREC Robust
TREC Robust 2004
TREC WSJ87–92
TREC WT10G
Yahoo! Answers
Chinese data
Baidu Tieba
Baidu Zhidao
Douban Forum
Sina Weibo
SogouT 2.0
Multi-lingual data
CLEF 2001–2003 Ad-hoc
FIRE 2013
iPinYou Liao et al. (2014)
UT Expert Retrieval
(Berendsen et al. 2013a)
Yandex
aNMM (Yang et al. 2016b), BLSTM (Wang and Nyberg 2015),
CDNN (Severyn and Moschitti 2015), Yu et al. (2014), Cohen et al.
(2016)
GLM (Ganguly et al. 2015), Roy et al. (2016b, 2016a)
Clinchant and Perronnin (2013), Diaz et al. (2016), Guo et al. (2016a),
Zamani and Croft (2016a, b), Zheng and Callan (2015)
Zuccon et al. (2015)
Roy et al. (2016b), Zheng and Callan (2015)
Boytsov et al. (2016), Zhou et al. (2015)
Study
Yan et al. (2016)
Yan et al. (2016), Zhang et al. (2014), Zhou et al. (2015)
Yan et al. (2016)
Yan et al. (2016), Zhang et al. (2014)
Zhang et al. (2014)
Study
Vulic and Moens (2015)
Gupta et al. (2014)
Zhang et al. (2016a)
Van Gysel et al. (2016b)
Borisov et al. (2016b)
GPU support and automatic differentiation (Baydin et al. 2015) are crucial features
required for fast training neural networks. Theano and TensorFlow, enable performing
matrix operations efficiently, in parallel, on GPU. Training neural networks with back
propagation requires computation of derivatives of the cost function with respect to every
parameter of the network. Automatic differentiation in Theano and TensorFlow relieve the
users from the effort on the manual derivation of derivatives of the objective function.
These libraries compute the derivatives automatically given the definition of the neural
network architecture and the cost function.
Publicly available implementations of existing neural IR models
The deep learning community has a strong tradition of sharing, in some version, the code
used to produce the experimental results reported in the field’s publications. The infor
mation retrieval community is increasingly adopting this attitude too. Some authors of
publications on neural IR models have shared their code; see e.g., DRMM (Guo et al.
2016a),24 HRED (Sordoni et al. 2015),25 SERT (Van Gysel et al. 2016a, b),26 CDNN
24 http://www.bigdatalab.ac.cn/benchmark/bm/bd?code=DRMM(LCH-IDF).
25 https://github.com/sordonia/hred-qs.
26 https://github.com/cvangysel/SERT.
123
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
173
(Severyn and Moschitti 2015),27 DeepMerge (Lee et al. 2015),28 DeepTR (Zheng and
Callan 2015),29 Mixed Deep (Gupta et al. 2014),30 NTLM (Zuccon et al. 2015),31 aNMM
(Yang et al. 2016b),32 KEDRLM (Roy et al. 2016a).33
References
Ai, Q., Yang, L., Guo, J., & Croft, W. B. (2016a). Analysis of the paragraph vector model for information
retrieval. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM international conference on the theory of information
retrieval, ACM, New York, NY, USA, ICTIR’16 (pp. 133–142).
Ai, Q., Yang, L., Guo, J., & Croft, W. B. (2016b). Improving language estimation with the paragraph vector
model for ad-hoc retrieval. In Proceedings of the 39th international ACM SIGIR conference on
research and development in information retrieval, ACM, New York, NY, USA, SIGIR’16 (pp.
869–872).
ALMasri, M., Berrut, C., & Chevallet, J. P. (2016). A comparison of deep learning based query expansion
with pseudo-relevance feedback and mutual information. In European conference on information
retrieval (pp. 709–715). Springer.
Amati, G., & Van Rijsbergen, C. J. (2002). Probabilistic models of information retrieval based on measuring
the divergence from randomness. ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS), 20(4), 357–389.
Amer, N. O., Mulhem, P., & Gery, M. (2016). Toward word embedding for personalized information
retrieval. In ACM SIGIR Workshop on Neural Information Retrieval (Neu-IR).
Andoni, A., & Indyk, P. (2006). Near-optimal hashing algorithms for approximate nearest neighbor in high
dimensions. In 2006 47th annual IEEE symposium on foundations of computer science (FOCS’06) (pp.
459–468). IEEE.
Arel, I., Rose, D. C., & Karnowski, T. P. (2010). Deep machine learning—A new frontier in artificial
intelligence research. IEEE Computational Intelligence Magazine, 5(4), 13–18.
Azimi, J., Alam, A., & Zhang, R. (2015) .Ads keyword rewriting using search engine results. In Proceedings
of the 24th international conference on world wide web, international world wide web conferences
steering committee, Republic and Canton of Geneva, Switzerland, WWW’15 Companion (pp. 3–4).
https://doi.org/10.1145/2740908.2742739.
Azzopardi, L., de Rijke, M., & Balog, K. (2007). Building simulated queries for known-item topics: An
analysis using six European languages. In 30th annual international ACM SIGIR conference on
research & development on information retrieval, ACM.
Bahdanau, D., Cho, K., & Bengio, Y. (2014). Neural machine translation by jointly learning to align and
translate. arXiv preprint arXiv:14090473.
Bai, B., Weston, J., Grangier, D., Collobert, R., Sadamasa, K., Qi, Y., et al. (2009). Supervised semantic
indexing. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM conference on information and knowledge management (pp
187–196). ACM.
Balikas, G., & Amini, M.R. (2016). An empirical study on large scale text classification with skip-gram
embeddings. In ACM SIGIR workshop on neural information retrieval (Neu-IR).
Bar-Yossef, Z., & Kraus, N. (2011). Context-sensitive query auto-completion. In Proceedings of the 20th
international conference on world wide web (pp 107–116). ACM.
Baroni, M., Dinu, G., & Kruszewski, G. (2014). Don’t count, predict! a systematic comparison of context
counting vs. context-predicting semantic vectors. In Proceedings of the 52nd annual meeting of the
association for computational linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) (pp. 238–247). Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Baydin, A. G., Pearlmutter, B. A., Radul, A. A., & Siskind, J. M. (2015). Automatic differentiation in
machine learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:150205767.
27 https://github.com/aseveryn/deep-qa.
28 https://ciir.cs.umass.edu/downloads/DeepMerge/.
29 http://www.cs.cmu.edu/*gzheng/code/TermRecallKit-v2.tar.bz2.
30 http://www.dsic.upv.es/*pgupta/mixed-script-ir.
31 https://github.com/ielab/adcs2015-NTLM.
32 https://github.com/yangliuy/aNMM-CIKM16.
33 https://github.com/gdebasis/kderlm.
123
174
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
Bengio, Y. (2009). Learning deep architectures for AI. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning, 2(1),
1–127.
Bengio, Y., Ducharme, R., Vincent, P., & Janvin, C. (2003a). A neural probabilistic language model.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3, 1137–1155.
Bengio, Y., & Sene ´cal, J. S. (2003b). Quick training of probabilistic neural nets by importance sampling. In
AISTATS.
Berendsen, R., Balog, K., Bogers, T., van den Bosch, A., & de Rijke, M. (2013a). On the assessment of
expertise profiles. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 64(10),
2024–2044.
Berendsen, R., Tsagkias, M., Weerkamp, W., & de Rijke, M. (2013b). Pseudo test collections for training
and tuning microblog rankers. In SIGIR’13: 36th international ACM SIGIR conference on research
and development in information retrieval. ACM.
Berger, A., & Lafferty, J. (1999). Information retrieval as statistical translation. In Proceedings of the 22nd
annual international ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in information retrieval
(pp. 222–229). ACM.
Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y., & Jordan, M. I. (2003). Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of machine Learning
research, 3(Jan), 993–1022.
Bordes, A., Chopra, S., & Weston, J. (2014). Question answering with subgraph embeddings. In Pro
ceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP) (pp.
615–620). Association for Computational Linguistics.
Borisov, A., Markov, I., de Rijke, M., & Serdyukov, P. (2016a). A context-aware time model for web
search. In SIGIR 2016: 39th international ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in
information retrieval (pp. 205–214). ACM.
Borisov, A., Markov, I., de Rijke, M., & Serdyukov, P. (2016b). A neural click model for web search. In
Proceedings of the 25th international conference on world wide web, international world wide web
conferences steering committee (pp. 531–541).
Boytsov, L., Novak, D., Malkov, Y., & Nyberg, E. (2016). Off the beaten path: Let’s replace term-based
retrieval with k-nn search. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM international on conference on information
and knowledge management (pp. 1099–1108). ACM.
Broder, A., Domingos, P., de Freitas, N., Guyon, I., Malik, J., & Neville, J. (2016). Is deep learning the new
42? In plenary panel at the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and
data mining.
Bromley, J., Bentz, J. W., Bottou, L., Guyon, I., LeCun, Y., Moore, C., et al. (1993). Signature verification
using a siamese time delay neural network. International Journal of Pattern Recognition and Artificial
Intelligence, 7(04), 669–688.
Cai, F., & de Rijke, M. (2016a). Learning from homologous queries and semantically related terms for query
auto completion. Information Processing & Management, 52(4), 628–643.
Cai, F., & de Rijke, M. (2016b). A survey of query auto completion in information retrieval. Foundations
and Trends in Information Retrieval, 10(4), 273–363.
Cai, F., Liang, S., & de Rijke, M. (2014). Time-sensitive personalized query auto-completion. In Pro
ceedings of the 23rd ACM international conference on conference on information and knowledge
management (pp. 1599–1608). ACM.
Carmel, D., Zwerdling, N., Guy, I., Ofek-Koifman, S., Har’El, N., Ronen, I., et al. (2009). Personalized
social search based on the user’s social network. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM conference on
information and knowledge management (pp. 1227–1236). ACM.
Carpineto, C., & Romano, G. (2012). A survey of automatic query expansion in information retrieval. ACM
Computing Surveys, 44(1), 1:1–1:50.
Cartright, M. A., Allan, J., Lavrenko, V., & McGregor, A. (2010). Fast query expansion using approxi
mations of relevance models. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM international conference on information
and knowledge management (pp. 1573–1576). ACM.
Charikar, M. S. (2002). Similarity estimation techniques from rounding algorithms. In Proceedings of the
thirty-fourth annual ACM symposium on theory of computing (pp. 380–388). ACM.
Chen, W., Grangier, D., & Auli, M. (2016). Strategies for training large vocabulary neural language models.
In Proceedings of the 54th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers) (pp. 1975–1985). Association for Computational Linguistics, Berlin, Germany.
Chirita, P. A., Firan, C. S., & Nejdl, W. (2007). Personalized query expansion for the web. In Proceedings of
the 30th annual international ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in information
retrieval (pp. 7–14). ACM.
Cho, K. (2015). Natural language understanding with distributed representation. arXiv preprint arXiv:
151107916.
123
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
175
Cho, K., van Merrienboer, B., Gu¨lc¸ehre, C¸., Bougares, F., Schwenk, H., & Bengio, Y. (2014). Learning
phrase representations using RNN encoder-decoder for statistical machine translation. CoRR arXiv:
1406.1078.
Chuklin, A., Markov, I., & de Rijke M. (2015). Click models for web search. Synthesis lectures on infor
mation concepts, retrieval, and services. Morgan & Claypool Publishers.
Chung, J., Gulcehre, C., Cho, K., & Bengio, Y. (2014). Empirical evaluation of gated recurrent neural
networks on sequence modeling. In NIPS workshop on deep learning.
Clinchant, S., & Perronnin, F. (2013). Aggregating continuous word embeddings for information retrieval.
In Proceedings of the workshop on continuous vector space models and their compositionality (pp.
100–109).
Cohen, D., Ai, Q., & Croft, W. B. (2016). Adaptability of neural networks on varying granularity IR tasks.
In ACM SIGIR workshop on neural information retrieval (Neu-IR).
Collobert, R., & Weston, J. (2008). A unified architecture for natural language processing: Deep neural
networks with multitask learning. In Proceedings of the 25th international conference on machine
learning (pp. 160–167). ACM.
Collobert, R., Weston, J., Bottou, L., Karlen, M., Kavukcuoglu, K., & Kuksa, P. (2011). Natural language
processing (almost) from scratch. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12(Aug), 2493–2537.
Conneau, A., Schwenk, H., Barrault, L., & Lecun, Y. (2016). Very deep convolutional networks for natural
language processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:160601781.
Croft, B., Metzler, D., & Strohman, T. (2009). Search engines: information retrieval in practice. Boston:
Addison-Wesley.
Dai, A. M., Olah, C., Le, Q. V., & Corrado, G. S. (2014). Document embedding with paragraph vectors. In
NIPS deep learning workshop.
Dang, V., & Croft, B. W. (2010). Query reformulation using anchor text. In Proceedings of the third ACM
international conference on web search and data mining (pp. 41–50). ACM.
Darragh, J. J., Witten, I. H., & James, M. L. (1990). The reactive keyboard: A predictive typing aid.
Computer, 23(11), 41–49.
Datar, M., Immorlica, N., Indyk, P., & Mirrokni, V. S. (2004). Locality-sensitive hashing scheme based on
p-stable distributions. In Proceedings of the twentieth annual symposium on computational geometry
(pp. 253–262). ACM.
De Vine, L., Zuccon, G., Koopman, B., Sitbon, L., & Bruza, P. (2014). Medical semantic similarity with a
neural language model. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM international conference on conference on
information and knowledge management (pp. 1819–1822). ACM.
Deerwester, S., Dumais, S. T., Furnas, G. W., Landauer, T. K., & Harshman, R. (1990). Indexing by latent
semantic analysis. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 41(6), 391.
Deng, L. (2014). A tutorial survey of architectures, algorithms, and applications for deep learning. APSIPA
Transactions on Signal and Information Processing, 3, e2.
Deng, L., & Yu, D. (2013). Deep learning: Methods and applications. Foundations and Trends in Signal
Processing, 7(3–4), 197–387.
Dhingra, B., Zhou, Z., Fitzpatrick, D., Muehl, M., & Cohen, W. (2016). Tweet2vec: Character-based
distributed representations for social media. In Proceedings of the 54th annual meeting of the asso
ciation for computational linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) (pp. 269–274), Association for Com
putational Linguistics.
Diaz, F., Mitra, B., & Craswell, N. (2016). Query expansion with locally-trained word embeddings. In 54th
annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) (pp.
367–377), Association for Computational Linguistics, Berlin, Germany.
Djuric, N., Wu, H., Radosavljevic, V., Grbovic, M., & Bhamidipati, N. (2015). Hierarchical neural language
models for joint representation of streaming documents and their content. In Proceedings of the 24th
international conference on world wide web, ACM, New York, NY, USA, WWW’15 (pp. 248–255).
Dumais, S., Banko, M., Brill, E., Lin, J., & Ng, A. (2002). Web question answering: Is more always better?
In Proceedings of the 25th annual International ACM SIGIR conference on research and development
in information retrieval (pp. 291–298). ACM.
Dyer, C. (2014). Notes on noise contrastive estimation and negative sampling. CoRR arXiv:1410.8251.
Elman, J. L. (1990). Finding structure in time. Cognitive Science, 14(2), 179–211.
Erhan, D., Bengio, Y., Courville, A., Manzagol, P. A., Vincent, P., & Bengio, S. (2010). Why does
unsupervised pre-training help deep learning? Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11(Feb),
625–660.
Faruqui, M., Dodge, J., Jauhar, S. K., Dyer, C., Hovy, E., & Smith, N. A. (2014). Retrofitting word vectors
to semantic lexicons. arXiv preprint arXiv:14114166.
123
176
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
Friedman, J. H. (2001). Greedy function approximation: A gradient boosting machine. Annals of Statistics,
29(5), 1189–1232.
Ganguly, D., Roy, D., Mitra, M., & Jones, G. J. (2015). Word embedding based generalized language model
for information retrieval. In Proceedings of the 38th international ACM SIGIR conference on research
and development in information retrieval (pp. 795–798). ACM.
Ganguly, D., Roy, D., Mitra, M., & Jones, G. (2016). Representing documents and queries as sets of word
embedded vectors for information retrieval. In ACM SIGIR workshop on neural information retrieval
(Neu-IR).
Gao, J., He, X., & Li, D. (2015). Deep learning for web search and natural language processing. Microsoft
Research Technical Report. Redmond, WA: Microsoft Corporation
Gao, J., He, X., & Nie, J. Y. (2010). Clickthrough-based translation models for web search: From word
models to phrase models. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM international conference on information and
knowledge management (CIKM) (pp. 1139–1148). ACM.
Gao, J., Pantel, P., Gamon, M., He, X., & Deng, L. (2014). Modeling interestingness with deep neural
networks. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing
(EMNLP), Association for Computational Linguistics, Doha, Qatar (pp. 2–13).
Goldberg, Y. (2016). A primer on neural network models for natural language processing. Journal of
Artificial Intelligence Research, 57, 345–420.
Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., & Courville, A. (2016). Deep learning. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Graves, A. (2012). Neural networks. In Supervised sequence labelling with recurrent neural networks (pp.
15–35). Springer.
Graves, A. (2013). Generating sequences with recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:13080850.
Graves, A., Wayne, G., & Danihelka, I. (2014). Neural turing machines. arXiv preprint arXiv:14105401.
Grbovic, M., Djuric, N., Radosavljevic, V., & Bhamidipati, N. (2015a). Search retargeting using directed
query embeddings. In Proceedings of the 24th international conference on world wide web, ACM,
New York, NY, USA, WWW’15 companion (pp. 37–38).
Grbovic, M., Djuric, N., Radosavljevic, V., Silvestri, F., & Bhamidipati, N. (2015b). Context-and content
aware embeddings for query rewriting in sponsored search. In Proceedings of the 38th international
ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in information retrieval (pp. 383–392). ACM.
Greff, K., Srivastava, R. K., Koutnı´k, J., Steunebrink, B. R., & Schmidhuber, J. (2015). Lstm: A search
space odyssey. arXiv preprint arXiv:150304069.
Guo, J., Fan, Y., Ai, Q., & Croft, W. B. (2016a). A deep relevance matching model for ad-hoc retrieval. In
The 25th ACM international conference on information and knowledge management, Indianapolis,
United States.
Guo, J., Fan, Y., Ai, Q., & Croft, W. B. (2016b). A deep relevance matching model for ad-hoc retrieval. In
CIKM 2016: 25th ACM conference on information and knowledge management, ACM.
Gupta, P., Bali, K., Banchs, R. E., Choudhury, M., & Rosso, P. (2014). Query expansion for mixed-script
information retrieval. In Proceedings of the 37th international ACM SIGIR conference on research &
development in information retrieval (pp. 677–686). ACM.
Gutmann, M. U., & Hyva¨rinen, A. (2012). Noise-contrastive estimation of unnormalized statistical models,
with applications to natural image statistics. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 13(1), 307–361.
Harman, D., & Buckley, C. (2009). Overview of the reliable information access workshop. Information
Retrieval, 12(6), 615–641.
Harris, Z. S. (1954). Distributional structure. Word, 10(2–3), 146–162.
Hill, F., Cho, K., & Korhonen, A. (2016). Learning distributed representations of sentences from unlabelled
data. In Proceedings of the 2016 conference of the North American chapter of the association for
computational linguistics: Human language technologies, Association for Computational Linguistics,
San Diego, California, (pp. 1367–1377).
Hinton, G., Deng, L., Yu, D., Dahl, G. E., Mohamed, Ar., Jaitly, N., et al. (2012). Deep neural networks for
acoustic modeling in speech recognition: The shared views of four research groups. IEEE Signal
Processing Magazine, 29(6), 82–97.
Hinton, G. E., & Salakhutdinov, R. R. (2006). Reducing the dimensionality of data with neural networks.
Science, 313(5786), 504–507.
Hochreiter, S., & Schmidhuber, J. (1997). Long short-term memory. Neural Computation, 9(8), 1735–1780.
Hu, B., Lu, Z., Li, H., & Chen, Q. (2014). Convolutional neural network architectures for matching natural
language sentences. In Advances in neural information processing systems (pp. 2042–2050).
Huang, P. S., He, X., Gao, J., Deng, L., Acero, A., & Heck, L. (2013). Learning deep structured semantic
models for web search using clickthrough data. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM international con
ference on information & knowledge management (pp. 2333–2338). ACM.
123
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
177
Jaakkola, T. S., & Haussler, D. (1999). Exploiting generative models in discriminative classifiers. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems (pp. 487–493).
Jiang, J. Y., Ke, Y. Y., Chien, P. Y., & Cheng, P. J. (2014). Learning user reformulation behavior for query
auto-completion. In Proceedings of the 37th international ACM SIGIR conference on research &
development in information retrieval (pp. 445–454). ACM.
Jurgovsky, J., Granitzer, M., & Seifert, C. (2016) Evaluating memory efficiency and robustness of word
embeddings. In European conference on information retrieval (pp. 200–211). Springer.
Kalchbrenner, N., Grefenstette, E., & Blunsom, P. (2014). A convolutional neural network for modelling
sentences. arXiv preprint arXiv:14042188.
Kanhabua, N., Ren, H., & Moeslund, T. B. (2016). Learning dynamic classes of events using stacked
multilayer perceptron networks. In ACM SIGIR workshop on neural information retrieval (Neu-IR).
Kenter, T., & de Rijke, M. (2015). Short text similarity with word embeddings. In Proceedings of the 24th
ACM international on conference on information and knowledge management (pp. 1411–1420). ACM.
Kim, S., Wilbur, W. J., & Lu, Z. (2016). Bridging the gap: A semantic similarity measure between queries
and documents. arXiv preprint arXiv:160801972.
Kim, Y. (2014). Convolutional neural networks for sentence classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:14085882.
Kiros, R., Zhu, Y., Salakhutdinov, R. R., Zemel, R., Urtasun, R., Torralba, A., et al. (2015). Skip-thought
vectors. In Advances in neural information processing systems (pp. 3294–3302).
Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., & Hinton, G. E. (2012). Imagenet classification with deep convolutional
neural networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems (pp. 1097–1105).
Kumar, A., Irsoy, O., Su, J., Bradbury, J., English, R., Pierce, B., et al. (2015). Ask me anything: Dynamic
memory networks for natural language processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:150607285.
Kusner, M. J., Sun, Y., Kolkin, N. I., & Weinberger, K. Q. (2015). From word embeddings to document
distances. In Proceedings of the 32nd international conference on machine learning (ICML 2015) (pp.
957–966).
Lavrenko, V., & Croft, W. B. (2001). Relevance based language models. In Proceedings of the 24th annual
international ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in information retrieval, ACM,
New York, NY, USA, SIGIR’01 (pp. 120–127).
Le, Q. V., & Mikolov, T. (2014). Distributed representations of sentences and documents. In ICML (Vol. 14,
pp. 1188–1196).
LeCun, Y., & Bengio, Y. (1995). Convolutional networks for images, speech, and time series. The Hand
book of Brain Theory and Neural Networks, 3361(10), 1995.
LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., & Hinton, G. (2015). Deep learning. Nature, 521(7553), 436–444.
Lee, C. J., Ai, Q., Croft, W. B., & Sheldon, D. (2015). An optimization framework for merging multiple
result lists. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM international on conference on information and knowledge
management (pp. 303–312). ACM.
Lei, T., Joshi, H., Barzilay, R., Jaakkola, T. S., Tymoshenko, K., Moschitti, A., et al. (2016). Semi
supervised question retrieval with gated convolutions. In NAACL HLT 2016, The 2016 conference of
the North American chapter of the association for computational linguistics: Human language tech
nologies, San Diego California, USA, June 12–17, 2016 (pp. 1279–1289).
Levy, O., Goldberg, Y., & Dagan, I. (2015). Improving distributional similarity with lessons learned from
word embeddings. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 3, 211–225.
Li, H. (2016, July). Does IR need deep learning? In Keynote speech at SIGIR 2016 Neu-IR workshop, Pisa.
Li, H., & Lu, Z. (2016). Deep learning for information retrieval. In SIGIR, Pisa, Italy, vol tutorial at the 39th
international ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in information retrieval (pp.
1203–1206).
Li, H., & Xu, J. (2013). Semantic matching in search. Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval,
7(5), 343–469.
Li, J., Luong, M. T., Jurafsky, D., & Hovy, E. (2015). When are tree structures necessary for deep learning
of representations? arXiv preprint arXiv:150300185.
Li, X., Guo, C., Chu, W., Wang, Y.-Y., & Shavlik, J. (2014). Deep learning powered in-session contextual
ranking using clickthrough data. In Workshop on personalization: Methods and applications, Neural
Information Processing Systems (NIPS).
Liao, H., Peng, L., Liu, Z., & Shen, X. (2014). ipinyou global rtb bidding algorithm competition dataset. In
Proceedings of the eighth international workshop on data mining for online advertising (pp. 1–6).
ACM.
Lioma, C., Larsen, B., Petersen, C., & Simonsen, J. G. (2016). Deep learning relevance: Creating relevant
information (as opposed to retrieving it). In ACM SIGIR workshop on neural information retrieval
(Neu-IR).
123
178
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
Liu, T. Y. (2009). Learning to rank for information retrieval. Foundations and Trends in Information
Retrieval, 3(3), 225–331.
Liu, W., Wang, J., Ji, R., Jiang, Y. G., & Chang, S. F. (2012). Supervised hashing with kernels. In 2012
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition (CVPR) (pp. 2074–2081). IEEE.
Liu, X., & Croft, W. B. (2004). Cluster-based retrieval using language models. In Proceedings of the 27th
annual international ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in information retrieval
(pp. 186–193). ACM.
Liu, X., Gao, J., He, X., Deng, L., Duh, K., & Wang, Y. Y. (2015). Representation learning using multi-task
deep neural networks for semantic classification and information retrieval. In Proceedings of the 2015
conference of the north american chapter of the association for computational linguistics: Human
language technologies, Association for Computational Linguistics, Denver, Colorado (pp. 912–921).
Lu, Z., & Li, H. (2013). A deep architecture for matching short texts. In Advances in neural information
processing systems (pp. 1367–1375).
Lund, K., & Burgess, C. (1996). Producing high-dimensional semantic spaces from lexical co-occurrence.
Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 28(2), 203–208.
Luukkonen, P., Koskela, M., & Floreen, P. (2016). LSTM-based predictions for proactive information
retrieval. In ACM SIGIR workshop on neural information retrieval (Neu-IR).
Ma, L., Lu, Z., & Li, H. (2015a). Learning to answer questions from image using convolutional neural
network. arXiv preprint arXiv:150600333.
Ma, L., Lu, Z., Shang, L., & Li, H. (2015b). Multimodal convolutional neural networks for matching image
and sentence. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision (pp.
2623–2631).
Ma, L., Lu, Z., & Li, H. (2016). Learning to answer questions from image using convolutional neural
network. In AAAI conference on artificial intelligence (pp. 3567–3573).
Manning, C. (2016). Understanding human language: Can NLP and deep learning help? In Proceedings of
the 39th international ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in information retrieval,
SIGIR ’16, Pisa, Italy. New York, NY: ACM.
Manning, C. D., Raghavan, P., & Schu¨tze, H. (2008). Introduction to information retrieval. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Manotumruksa, J., Macdonald, C., & Ounis, I. (2016). Modelling user preferences using word embeddings
for context-aware venue recommendation. In ACM SIGIR workshop on neural information retrieval
(Neu-IR).
McAuley, J., Pandey, R., & Leskovec, J. (2015). Inferring networks of substitutable and complementary
products. In KDD: ACM (pp. 785–794).
McClelland, J. L., Rumelhart, D. E., PDP Research Group. (1986). Parallel distributed processing. Explo
rations in the microstructure of cognition (Vol. 2, pp. 216–271).
Mesnil, G., He, X., Deng, L., & Bengio, Y. (2013). Investigation of recurrent-neural-network architectures
and learning methods for spoken language understanding. In INTERSPEECH (pp. 3771–3775).
Mesnil, G., Mikolov, T., Ranzato, M., & Bengio, Y. (2014). Ensemble of generative and discriminative
techniques for sentiment analysis of movie reviews. In International conference on learning repre
sentations (ICLR).
Metz, C. (2016). AI is transforming Google search. The rest of the web is next. WIRED Magazine.
Mikolov, T., Karafia ´t, M., Burget, L., Cernocky`, J., & Khudanpur, S. (2010). Recurrent neural network
based language model. In INTERSPEECH (pp. 1045–1048).
Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., & Dean, J. (2013a). Efficient estimation of word representations in
vector space. CoRR arXiv:1301.3781.
Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Chen, K., Corrado, G. S., & Dean, J. (2013b). Distributed representations of
words and phrases and their compositionality. In C. J. C. Burges, L. Bottou, M. Welling, Z.
Ghahramani, & K. Q. Weinberger (Eds.), Advances in neural information processing systems (Vol. 26,
pp. 3111–3119). Curran Associates, Inc.
Mikolov, T., Yih, W., & Zweig, G. (2013c). Linguistic regularities in continuous space word representa
tions. In Proceedings of the 2013 conference of the North American chapter of the association for
computational linguistics: Human language technologies, Association for Computational Linguistics,
Atlanta, Georgia, (pp. 746–751).
Mitchell, J., & Lapata, M. (2010). Composition in distributional models of semantics. Cognitive Science,
34(8), 1388–1429. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1551-6709.2010.01106.x.
Mitra, B. (2015). Exploring session context using distributed representations of queries and reformulations.
In Proceedings of the 38th international ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in
information retrieval (pp. 3–12). ACM.
123
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
179
Mitra, B., & Craswell, N. (2015). Query auto-completion for rare prefixes. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM
international on conference on information and knowledge management (pp. 1755–1758). ACM.
Mitra, B., Nalisnick, E., Craswell, N., & Caruana, R. (2016). A dual embedding space model for document
ranking. arXiv preprint arXiv:160201137.
Mnih, A., & Teh, Y. W. (2012). A fast and simple algorithm for training neural probabilistic language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:12066426.
Morin, F., & Bengio, Y. (2005). Hierarchical probabilistic neural network language model. In Proceedings
of the tenth international workshop on artificial intelligence and statistics, AISTATS 2005, Bridgetown,
Barbados, January 6–8, 2005.
Moshfeghi, Y., Triantafillou, P., & Pollick, F. E. (2016). Understanding information need: An fMRI study.
In Proceedings of the 39th international ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in
information retrieval, ACM, New York, NY, USA, SIGIR’16 (pp. 335–344).
Nair, V., & Hinton, G. E. (2010). Rectified linear units improve restricted Boltzmann machines. In Pro
ceedings of the 27th international conference on machine learning (ICML-10) (pp. 807–814).
Nalisnick, E., Mitra, B., Craswell, N., & Caruana, R. (2016). Improving document ranking with dual word
embeddings. In 25th World Wide Web (WWW) conference companion volume, International World
Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee (pp. 83–84).
Neelakantan, A., Shankar, J., Passos, A., & McCallum, A. (2014). Efficient non-parametric estimation of
multiple embeddings per word in vector space. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical
methods in natural language processing (EMNLP) (pp. 1059–1069).
Nguyen, G. H., Tamine, L., Soulier, L., & Bricon-Souf, N. (2016). Toward a deep neural approach for
knowledge-based IR. In ACM SIGIR workshop on neural information retrieval (Neu-IR).
Onal, K. D., Altingovde, I. S., & Karagoz, P. (2015). Utilizing word embeddings for result diversification in
tweet search (pp. 366–378). Cham: Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-28940-3_29.
Ordentlich, E., Yang, L., Feng, A., Cnudde, P., Grbovic, M., Djuric, N., et al. (2016). Network-efficient
distributed Word2vec training system for large vocabularies. In The 25th ACM international confer
ence on information and knowledge management, Indianapolis, United States.
Palakodety, S., & Callan, J. (2014). Query transformations for result merging. In Proceedings of the twenty
third text REtrieval conference, TREC 2014, Gaithersburg, Maryland, USA, November 19–21, 2014.
Palangi, H., Deng, L., Shen, Y., Gao, J., He, X., Chen, J., et al. (2014). Semantic modelling with long-short
term memory for information retrieval. CoRR arXiv:1412.6629.
Palangi, H., Deng, L., Shen, Y., Gao, J., He, X., Chen, J., et al. (2016). Deep sentence embedding using long
short-term memory networks: Analysis and application to information retrieval. IEEE/ACM Trans
actions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, 24(4), 694–707.
Pang, L., Lan, Y., Guo, J., Xu, J., & Cheng, X. (2016a) A study of matchpyramid models on ad-hoc
retrieval. In ACM SIGIR workshop on neural information retrieval (Neu-IR).
Pang, L., Lan, Y., Guo, J., Xu, J., Wan, S., & Cheng, X. (2016b). Text matching as image recognition. In
30th AAAI conference on artificial intelligence (pp. 2793–2799).
Pascanu, R., Mikolov, T., & Bengio, Y. (2013). On the difficulty of training recurrent neural networks.
ICML (3), 28, 1310–1318.
Pennington, J., Socher, R., & Manning, C. D. (2014). Glove: Global vectors for word representation. In
EMNLP (Vol. 14, pp. 1532–1543).
Ponte, J. M., & Croft, W. B. (1998). A language modeling approach to information retrieval. In Proceedings
of the 21st annual international ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in information
retrieval (pp. 275–281). ACM.
Radlinski, F., & Joachims, T. (2005). Query chains: Learning to rank from implicit feedback. In Pro
ceedings of the eleventh ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery in data
mining, ACM, New York, NY, USA, KDD’05 (pp. 239–248).
Rekabsaz, N., Lupu, M., & Hanbury, A. (2016a). Uncertainty in neural network word embedding explo
ration of potential threshold. In ACM SIGIR workshop on neural information retrieval (Neu-IR).
Rekabsaz, N., Lupu, M., Hanbury, A., & Zuccon, G. (2016b) Generalizing translation models in the
probabilistic relevance framework. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM international on conference on
information and knowledge management, CIKM ’16, Indianapolis, Indiana (pp. 711–720). New York,
NY: ACM.
Robertson, S. (2004). Understanding inverse document frequency: On theoretical arguments for idf. Journal
of Documentation, 60(5), 503–520.
Rocchio, J. J. (1971). Relevance feedback in information retrieval. The smart retrieval system-experiments
in automatic document processing (pp. 313–323).
123
180
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
Roy, D., Ganguly, D., Mitra, M., & Jones, G. J. (2016a). Word vector compositionality based relevance
feedback using kernel density estimation. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM international on conference
on information and knowledge management, ACM, New York, NY, USA, CIKM’16 (pp. 1281–1290).
Roy, D., Paul, D., & Mitra, M. (2016b). Using word embeddings for automatic query expansion. In ACM
SIGIR workshop on neural information retrieval (Neu-IR).
Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E., & Williams, R. J. (1988). Learning representations by back-propagating
errors. Cognitive Modeling, 5(3), 1.
Salakhutdinov, R., & Hinton, G. (2009). Semantic hashing. International Journal of Approximate Rea
soning, 50(7), 969–978.
Schmidhuber, J. (2015). Deep learning in neural networks: An overview. Neural Networks, 61, 85–117.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2014.09.003.
Sennrich, R., Haddow, B., & Birch, A. (2016). Neural machine translation of rare words with subword units.
In Proceedings of the 54th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers), Association for Computational Linguistics, Berlin, Germany (pp. 1715–1725).
Severyn, A., & Moschitti, A. (2015). Learning to rank short text pairs with convolutional deep neural
networks. In Proceedings of the 38th international ACM SIGIR conference on research and devel
opment in information retrieval (pp. 373–382). ACM.
Shen, Y., He, X., Gao, J., Deng, L., & Mesnil, G. (2014a). A latent semantic model with convolutional
pooling structure for information retrieval. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM international conference
on conference on information and knowledge management (pp. 101–110). ACM.
Shen, Y., He, X., Gao, J., Deng, L., & Mesnil, G. (2014b). Learning semantic representations using
convolutional neural networks for web search. In Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on
world wide web (pp. 373–374). ACM.
Shokouhi, M., & Radinsky, K. (2012). Time-sensitive query auto-completion. In Proceedings of the 35th
international ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in information retrieval (pp.
601–610). ACM.
Smolensky, P. (1986). Information processing in dynamical systems: Foundations of harmony theory.
Technical report, DTIC document.
Socher, R., Chen, D., Manning, C. D., & Ng, A. (2013). Reasoning with neural tensor networks for
knowledge base completion. In Advances in neural information processing systems (pp. 926–934).
Song, Y., Elkahky, A. M., & He, X. (2016). Multi-rate deep learning for temporal recommendation. In
Proceedings of the 39th international ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in
information retrieval, ACM, New York, NY, USA, SIGIR’16 (pp. 909–912).
Sordoni, A., Bengio, Y., & Nie, J.Y. (2014). Learning concept embeddings for query expansion by quantum
entropy minimization. In AAAI (pp. 1586–1592).
Sordoni, A., Bengio, Y., Vahabi, H., Lioma, C., Grue Simonsen, J., & Nie, J. Y. (2015). A hierarchical
recurrent encoder-decoder for generative context-aware query suggestion. In Proceedings of the 24th
ACM international on conference on information and knowledge management (CIKM) (pp. 553–562).
ACM.
Suggu, S. P., Goutham, K. N., Chinnakotla, M. K., & Shrivastava, M. (2016). Deep feature fusion network
for answer quality prediction in community question answering. In ACM SIGIR workshop on neural
information retrieval (Neu-IR).
Sutskever, I., Vinyals, O., & Le ,Q. V. (2014). Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks. In
Advances in neural information processing systems (pp. 3104–3112).
Tai, K. S., Socher, R., & Manning, C. D. (2015). Improved semantic representations from tree-structured
long short-term memory networks. In Proceedings of the 53rd annual meeting of the association for
computational linguistics and the 7th international joint conference on natural language processing
(Volume 1: Long Papers), Association for Computational Linguistics, Beijing, China (pp. 1556–1566).
Turney, P. D., & Pantel, P. (2010). From frequency to meaning: Vector space models of semantics. Journal
of Artificial Intelligence Research (JAIR), 37, 141–188. https://doi.org/10.1613/jair.2934.
van der Maaten, L., & Hinton, G. (2008). Visualizing data using t-SNE. Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 9, 2579–2605.
Van Gysel, C., de Rijke, M., & Kanoulas, E. (2016a). Learning latent vector spaces for product search. In
CIKM 2016: 25th ACM conference on information and knowledge management. ACM.
Van Gysel, C., de Rijke, M., & Worring, M. (2016b). Unsupervised, efficient and semantic expertise
retrieval. In Proceedings of the 25th international conference on world wide web, international world
wide web conferences steering committee, Republic and Canton of Geneva, Switzerland, WWW’16
(pp. 1069–1079). https://doi.org/10.1145/2872427.2882974.
123
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
181
Vulic, I., & Moens, M. F. (2015). Monolingual and cross-lingual information retrieval models based on
(bilingual) word embeddings. In Proceedings of the 38th international ACM SIGIR conference on
research and development in information retrieval (pp. 363–372). ACM.
Wan, J., Wang, D., Hoi, S. C. H., Wu, P., Zhu, J., Zhang, Y., et al. (2014). Deep learning for content-based
image retrieval: A comprehensive study. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM international conference on
multimedia (pp. 157–166). ACM.
Wang, D., & Nyberg, E. (2015). A long short-term memory model for answer sentence selection in question
answering. ACL, July.
Wang, M., Smith, N. A., & Mitamura, T. (2007). What is the jeopardy model? a quasi-synchronous grammar
for qa. In EMNLP-CoNLL (Vol. 7, pp. 22–32).
Wei, X., & Croft, W. B. (2006). Lda-based document models for ad-hoc retrieval. In Proceedings of the 29th
annual international ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in information retrieval
(pp. 178–185). ACM.
Weiss, Y., Torralba. A., & Fergus, R. (2009). Spectral hashing. In Advances in neural information pro
cessing systems (pp. 1753–1760).
Weston, J., Bengio, S., & Usunier, N. (2010). Large scale image annotation: Learning to rank with joint
word-image embeddings. Machine Learning, 81(1), 21–35.
Weston, J., Chopra, S., & Bordes, A. (2014). Memory networks. In International conference on learning
representations (ICLR).
Wu, Q., Burges, C. J., Svore, K. M., & Gao, J. (2010). Adapting boosting for information retrieval measures.
Information Retrieval, 13(3), 254–270.
Wu, Y., Schuster, M., Chen, Z., Le, Q. V., Norouzi, M., Macherey, W., et al. (2016). Google’s neural
machine translation system: Bridging the gap between human and machine translation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:160908144.
Xia, L., Xu, J., Lan, Y., Guo, J., & Cheng, X. (2015). Learning maximal marginal relevance model via
directly optimizing diversity evaluation measures. In Proceedings of the 38th international ACM
SIGIR conference on research and development in information retrieval (pp. 113–122). ACM.
Xia, L., Xu, J., Lan, Y., Guo, J., & Cheng, X. (2016). Modeling document novelty with neural tensor
network for search result diversification. In Proceedings of the 39th international ACM SIGIR con
ference on research and development in information retrieval, Pisa, Italy (pp. 395–404).
Xu, C., Bai, Y., Bian, J., Gao, B., Wang, G., Liu, X., et al. (2014). Rc-net: A general framework for
incorporating knowledge into word representations. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM international
conference on conference on information and knowledge management (pp. 1219–1228). ACM.
Xu, K., Ba, J., Kiros, R., Cho, K., Courville, A.C., Salakhutdinov, R., et al. (2015). Show, attend and tell:
Neural image caption generation with visual attention. CoRR arXiv:1502.03044.
Yan, R., Song, Y., & Wu, H. (2016) Learning to respond with deep neural networks for retrieval-based
human–computer conversation system. In Proceedings of the 39th international ACM SIGIR confer
ence on research and development in information retrieval (pp. 55–64). ACM.
Yang, J., Stones, R., Wang, G., & Liu, X. (2016a). Selective term proximity scoring via BP-ANN. In ACM
SIGIR workshop on neural information retrieval (Neu-IR).
Yang, L., Ai, Q., Guo, J., & Croft, W. B. (2016b). aNMM: Ranking short answer texts with attention-based
neural matching model. In The 25th ACM international conference on information and knowledge
management, Indianapolis, United States.
Yang, X., Macdonald, C., & Ounis, I. (2016c). Using word embeddings in twitter election classification. In
ACM SIGIR workshop on neural information retrieval (Neu-IR).
Ye, X., Qi, Z., & Massey, D. (2015). Learning relevance from click data via neural network based similarity
models. In 2015 IEEE international conference on big data (big data) (pp. 801–806). IEEE.
Ye, X., Shen, H., Ma, X., Bunescu, R., & Liu, C. (2016). From word embeddings to document similarities
for improved information retrieval in software engineering. In Proceedings of the 38th international
conference on software engineering (pp. 404–415). ACM.
Yi, X., & Allan, J. (2009). A comparative study of utilizing topic models for information retrieval. In
European conference on information retrieval (pp. 29–41). Springer.
Yu, D., & Deng, L. (2011). Deep learning and its applications to signal and information processing. IEEE
Signal Processing Magazine, 28(1), 145–154.
Yu, L., Hermann, K. M., Blunsom, P., & Pulman, S. (2014). Deep learning for answer sentence selection.
arXiv preprint arXiv:14121632.
Zamani, H., & Croft, W. B. (2016a). Embedding-based query language models. In Proceedings of the 2016
ACM international conference on the theory of information retrieval (pp. 147–156).
Zamani, H., & Croft, W. B. (2016b). Estimating embedding vectors for queries. In Proceedings of the 2016
ACM on international conference on the theory of information retrieval (pp. 123–132). ACM.
123
182
Inf Retrieval J (2018) 21:111–182
Zhai, S., Chang, K., Zhang, R., & Zhang, Z. (2016a). Attention based recurrent neural networks for online
advertising. In Proceedings of the 25th international conference companion on world wide web,
international world wide web conferences steering committee, Republic and Canton of Geneva,
Switzerland, WWW’16 Companion (pp. 141–142).
Zhai, S., Chang, K., Zhang, R., & Zhang, Z. M. (2016b). Deepintent: Learning attentions for online
advertising with recurrent neural networks. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international
conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, ACM, New York, NY, USA, KDD’16 (pp.
1295–1304).
Zhang, Q., Kang, J., Qian, J., & Huang, X. (2014). Continuous word embeddings for detecting local text
reuses at the semantic level. In Proceedings of the 37th international ACM SIGIR conference on
research & development in information retrieval (pp. 797–806). ACM.
Zhang, W., Du, T., & Wang, J. (2016a). Deep learning over multi-field categorical data. In European
conference on information retrieval (pp. 45–57). Springer.
Zhang, X., Zhao, J., & LeCun, Y. (2015). Character-level convolutional networks for text classification. In
Advances in neural information processing systems (pp. 649–657).
Zhang, Y., & Wallace, B. (2015). A sensitivity analysis of (and practitioners’ guide to) convolutional neural
networks for sentence classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:151003820.
Zhang, Y., Roller, S., & Wallace, B. C. (2016b). MGNC-CNN: A simple approach to exploiting multiple
word embeddings for sentence classification. In Proceedings of the 2016 conference of the North
American chapter of the association for computational linguistics: Human language technologies,
association for computational linguistics, San Diego, California (pp. 1522–1527).
Zhang, Y., Lease, M., & Wallace, B. C. (2017). Exploiting domain knowledge via grouped weight sharing
with application to text categorization. arXiv preprint arXiv:170202535.
Zheng, G., & Callan, J. (2015). Learning to reweight terms with distributed representations. In Proceedings
of the 38th international ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in information
retrieval, ACM, New York, NY, USA, SIGIR’15 (pp. 575–584).
Zhou, G., He, T., Zhao, J., & Hu, P. (2015). Learning continuous word embedding with metadata for
question retrieval in community question answering. In Proceedings of ACL (pp. 250–259).
Zhu, Y., Lan, Y., Guo, J., Cheng, X., & Niu, S. (2014). Learning for search result diversification. In
Proceedings of the 37th international ACM SIGIR conference on research & development in infor
mation retrieval (pp. 293–302). ACM.
Zuccon, G., Koopman, B., Bruza, P., & Azzopardi, L. (2015). Integrating and evaluating neural word
embeddings in information retrieval. In Proceedings of the 20th Australasian document computing
symposium (p. 12). ACM.
123